The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Geography of New Jersey, by Henry Snyder

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Geography of New Jersey

Author: Henry Snyder

Release Date: September 4, 2021 [eBook #66218]

Language: English


Produced by: Tom Cosmas produced from files generously provided on The
             Internet Archive and placed in the Public Domain.

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GEOGRAPHY OF NEW JERSEY ***




Transcriber Note

Text emphasis denoted as _Italics_ and =Bold=. Table of Contents added
to assist the reader.




GEOGRAPHY OF NEW JERSEY


Henry Snyder, A.M., Sc.D.

Superintendent of Schools, Jersey City, New Jersey


Copyright, 1916, 1921, by American Book Company.




                    Table of Contents

       Section                          PAGE
  EARLY HISTORY                             i
  POSITION AND SIZE                        iv
  RELIEF                                   iv
  CLIMATE                                 vii
  DRAINAGE                               viii
  PLANTS AND ANIMALS                       ix
  AGRICULTURE                              xi
  MINERALS                                xii
  TRAVEL AND TRANSPORTATION               xiv
  RECREATION AND HEALTH                    xv
  GOVERNMENT AND EDUCATION                xvi
  POPULATION                              xix
  CITIES, TOWNS, BOROUGHS, AND VILLAGES    xx
  TABLES                                xxvii




EARLY HISTORY


The original inhabitants of New Jersey H were Indians of the Delaware
tribe, which belonged to the Algonquin family. The early white settlers
were of different nationalities,--Dutch, Swedes, English, and French.
The geographical names of the state are interesting reminders of the
various occupants.

The first exploration of the state was made by Henry Hudson, who, in
the employ of the Dutch East India Company, sailed for a week in 1609
on the waters of Delaware Bay and Delaware River, which the Dutch
called South River, in search of a northwest passage to India. Failing
to find it, he sailed north and entered New York Bay and Hudson River,
or North River, as it is still called. In 1614 the Dutch founded New
Amsterdam, afterwards New York, and, about the same time, established a
trading post in what is now Hudson County. Later the Swedes attempted
settlements in the southwestern part of the state, but were expelled by
the Dutch. The Dutch made settlements at various places, some of which
proved to be only temporary. The first permanent settlement in New
Jersey was at Bergen, now a part of Jersey City, to which was granted a
town form of government, separate from that of New Amsterdam, in 1660.

In 1664 the English took possession of New Netherland--the Dutch Colony
including New York and New Jersey, King Charles II granted it to his
brother, the Duke of York, who in turn granted that part of it lying
between the Hudson and Delaware rivers to Lord John Berkeley and Sir
George Carteret. The latter had been governor of the Isle of Jersey,
and their new grant was named New Jersey in his honor. Disagreements
between Carteret and Berkeley led the latter to sell his interest to
other proprietors, among whom afterwards was William Penn. In 1676 the
colony was divided into East Jersey and West Jersey by a line running
from Little Egg Harbor to the Delaware in the northern part of the
state. It is because of this division that the state is still often
referred to as "the Jerseys." In 1702 the proprietors surrendered their
proprietary rights to the crown. From that time to its independence the
whole of New Jersey was under royal government.

Five representatives from New Jersey signed the Declaration of
Independence. The position of the state made it "The War Path of the
Revolution." Paulus Hook, Springfield, Morristown, Monmouth, Princeton,
and Trenton are famous names in Revolutionary history. The troops of
the state were in every conflict. In the army of General Wayne, which
punished the Indians after the Wyoming massacre, one third were New
Jersey soldiers under General Maxwell.

[Illustration: Trenton Battle Monument]

[Illustration: Physical and Political New Jersey (north half)]

[Illustration: Physical and Political New Jersey (south half)]




POSITION AND SIZE


New Jersey lies between 73° 55′ and 75° 32′ west longitude and between
38° 56′ and 41° 21′ north latitude. Its northernmost point is marked by
a rock on the shore of the Delaware River just south of Port Jervis,
New York, known as Tri-States Rock. From this point to Cape May the
length of the state is 166 miles. Its narrowest part, between Trenton
and Raritan Bay, is 335 miles wide. Its widest part, measured on a line
extending northwest from Great Egg Inlet, is 57 miles wide.

It is the smallest of the Middle Atlantic states and has an area of
8224 square miles, of which 7514 square miles are land surface and 710
square miles are water surface. It is the forty-fifth of the states in
size.




RELIEF


In a general way the surface of New Jersey may be described as
mountainous in the northern part, undulating in the middle part, and
low and sandy in the southern part. The state is divided into four
provinces or zones; namely, the Appalachian zone, the Highlands, the
Piedmont Plateau, and the Coastal Plain. These zones extend from
southwest to northeast.

[Illustration: Tri-States Rock in the Delaware River. The rock on which
the man stands is at the intersection of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and
New York boundaries]

[Illustration: Topographic provinces of New Jersey]

The Appalachian zone, which consists of Kittatinny Mountain and
Kittatinny Valley, extends across the northwestern part of the state
from the Delaware River in the vicinity of the Delaware Water Gap to
the New York state line. The width of this belt varies from twelve to
fourteen miles. The Kittatinny Mountain extends along the Delaware
River for thirty miles in the northwestern corner of the state. It
extends into Pennsylvania, where it is known as Blue Mountain. The
height of this range varies from 1500 feet to 1800 feet. Its highest
point and the highest in the state is High Point, which has an
elevation of 1804 feet. The Kittatinny Valley is on the southeast side
of Kittatinny Mountain and runs parallel with it.

[Illustration: Relief map of New Jersey]

The Appalachian zone, with its rugged surface, extensive forests, and
many lakes, is noted for its beautiful scenery, which attracts many
summer visitors. The Delaware Water Gap is particularly noted on this
account. This is a break in the Kittatinny Mountain through which the
Delaware River flows. Because of the rough surface this section of
the state is not adapted to agriculture, although on the bottom lands
bordering on the streams and in the Kittatinny Valley there are many
farms devoted to the raising of crops and to grazing.

The second zone, The Highlands, immediately southeast of the
Appalachian zone, extends from the Delaware River into New York. Its
southeastern boundary passes near Morristown and Boonton. This zone
is from ten to twenty miles wide. Its height generally varies from
900 feet to 1400 feet. Hamburg Mountain and Wawayanda Mountain reach
an altitude of 1469 feet. The Highlands, as well as the Appalachian
zone, belong to the Appalachian region, but in New Jersey the term
"Appalachian" is applied only to the region consisting of Kittatinny
Mountain and Valley.

The Highlands contain many irregular mountain masses, interspersed with
fertile valleys, and much forest land. The zone contains, besides, many
lakes, most of which are of glacial origin. The section is consequently
one of great natural beauty, and is a popular resort for many who
desire out-door recreation. There is much fertile farm land and land
suitable for grazing. Parts of it are specially suitable for the
raising of peaches and other fruits. It contains many valuable mineral
deposits, including gravel, cement rock, zinc, and iron.

Next to the Highlands and parallel with it is the Piedmont Plateau.
This extends from the Delaware River to the northeast corner of the
state and is about thirty miles wide. Its southeastern boundary is a
line running from Trenton to Woodbridge in Middlesex County, which
represents in this state the Fall Line (Sec. 47). It comprises about
one fifth of the area of the state. Its elevation varies from sea level
to about 900 feet.

The Piedmont Plateau is characterized by the presence of red sandstone
and shale. Its surface is very irregular. In its eastern part it is
undulating or rolling. In the western, it contains higher lands which
may be called plateaus. It contains also irregular ridges such as
the Watchung Mountains, the Palisades, and the mountains in Hunterdon
County. The Watchung Mountains and the Palisades are composed of trap
rock, which in a molten condition was forced up through overlying rock
strata. The eastern sides of these trap ridges are steep slopes. The
underlying sandstone has been worn away while the harder trap rock has
resisted erosion.

[Illustration: The Palisades of the Hudson]

The Falls of the Passaic River at Paterson are located in this section.
These falls, which are seventy feet high, were formed by the water
passing over the hard trap rock and wearing away the softer rock below.

Because of the nearness of the Piedmont Plateau to the great commercial
centers of the country and the excellent facilities for transportation,
most of the larger cities of the state are located in this zone.

[Illustration: Barnegat lighthouse]

The fourth zone, the Coastal Plain, includes the remainder of the state
south and east of the Fall Line. The land of this zone is highest
in the interior along a range of elevations extending from Atlantic
Highlands in the northeast to Mount Holly in the southwest, and slopes
outward from these elevations towards the margins of the zone. The
greatest elevation is 390 feet, which is found in Monmouth County.
About three fourths of this portion of the state has an elevation of
less than 100 feet and about one third has an elevation of less than 50
feet. The Coastal Plain is bordered along Delaware Bay and the Atlantic
Coast by salt marshes, or tidal marshes, often called salt meadows,
whose elevation above sea level is rarely as much as four feet. The
total area of these marshes, including those of the valley of the
Hackensack River, is almost 660 square miles. Along the Atlantic coast
the marshes are separated from the ocean by beaches. These are low
ridges of sand, constructed in the shallow water by the action of the
waves and wind. These beaches are absent along the shore of Delaware
Bay and along the coast from Manasquan to Monmouth Beach. The water
between the beaches and the mainland is shallow and is becoming more
shallow because of the deposit of sediment which is washed down from
the land by streams.

Although the coast line of the state along the Atlantic is 120 miles
long, there are no good harbors on this line, because of the barrier
beaches and the shallowness of the water between the beaches and the
mainland.

The northern fourth of New Jersey was covered by ice during the Glacial
Period (Sec. 32). It therefore contains many moraines, or deposits of
material carried along by the glacier. These deposits consist of clay,
sand, gravel, and bowlders. In some places they take the form of hills
or ridges, in others they are spread out as level sheets. Some valleys
are partly filled by them. Many lakes in the northern part of the state
occupy basins which were scooped out by the glacier, or were formed
from river valleys whose outlets were blocked by glacial deposits. The
terminal moraine which marks the southern limit of the glacier extends
from Belvidere, through Morristown, to Perth Amboy. As the ice passed
over the hard rocks of the mountains it polished their surfaces, and
left in them scratches, which indicate the general southward movement
of the glacier.

The Coastal Plain was once beneath the ocean and was part of the
continental shelf which extends along the Atlantic. The ancient shore
is now the Fall Line.




CLIMATE


The climate of New Jersey is milder and less subject to extreme
fluctuation than that of the interior states in the same latitude,
because it extends along the ocean (Sec. 107). The average annual
temperature of New Jersey is 51.5°. The average annual temperature of
the extreme northern part is 5° lower than that of the extreme southern
end of the state. The lower temperature of the northern part of the
state is due to the higher latitude, its distance from the ocean, and
its greater altitude.

The prevailing winds are from the west and northwest. New Jersey is in
the track of storms, which cross the continent from the west. The south
and east winds blowing from the ocean toward the storm centers bring
with them much moisture and insure the state an ample rainfall. Local
showers or thunderstorms which move from the west or northwest are
frequent in the spring and summer months. In the summer time all along
the coast the benefit of sea breezes is felt (Sec. 372).

The rainfall is sufficient for all kinds of crops which can be grown in
the state. It is greatest in the northeastern part of the state, where
the annual precipitation is more than fifty inches; and least in the
southern and southwestern part along Delaware Bay, where it is about
forty-one inches.

[Illustration: Sandy Hook from the Highland Light]

[Illustration: Drainage basins in New Jersey]




DRAINAGE


The divide between the streams that flow into the Delaware River and
Delaware Bay on the west and those that flow into the Hudson River,
Newark Bay, New York Bay, Raritan Bay, Sandy Hook Bay, and Atlantic
Ocean on the east is a very irregular line extending from the northwest
corner of the state to Cape May. It is so near the Delaware River and
Delaware Bay that only a little more than one third of the state is
drained into these waters. The tributaries which drain this basin are,
therefore, small. The eastern drainage area contains several rivers
of considerable size. The Wallkill River flows northeast through the
northwestern part of this state and through the southeast corner of
New York into the Hudson River. The Hackensack River rises in New
York and flows south into Newark Bay. The Passaic River, which has as
tributaries Saddle River, Pompton River, Ramapo River, Wanaque River
with Greenwood Lake, Pequannock River, and Rockaway River, follows
a very tortuous course and flows into Newark Bay. Just north of the
middle of the state is the Raritan River, which rises near the Delaware
River and flows into Raritan Bay.

All the rivers which flow into the Atlantic Ocean or into the bays
which border the state are affected by the tidal flow, and the largest
are navigable for at least some parts of their courses. In the case
of the Delaware the tide extends to Trenton. Important cities which
are located on tidal waters are Hoboken, Jersey City, Bayonne, Newark,
Elizabeth, New Brunswick, Perth Amboy, Long Branch, Asbury Park,
Atlantic City, Camden, and Trenton.

Between the Watchung Mountains on the east and south and the Highlands
on the northwest is a broad, flat basin, which is drained by the
Passaic River. Before the Glacial Period the Passaic River did not flow
from this basin through the mountains at Little Falls and Paterson, as
it does now. This area was then drained by a stream which crossed the
Watchung Mountains near Summit and Millburn and flowed southeast into
the sea. During the Glacial Period most of this basin was covered by
the ice sheet. As the ice receded, this gap in the Watchung Mountains
was filled with glacial drift and there was formed a large lake, which
the geologists call Lake Passaic and which was drained for a long time
by a stream which flowed southwest through the hills near Liberty
Corner into the Raritan River. As the ice sheet receded still farther
north, the gaps through the mountains at Little Falls and Paterson were
exposed. As these gaps are lower than the older outlets, the water
of Lake Passaic escaped through them over the present course of the
Passaic River to Newark Bay, and the lake disappeared. These changes in
the drainage of the Passaic basin explain the presence of much swampy
land in this section.

The water power generated by the rapid descent of the streams in the
part of the state lying north of the Fall Line has long been utilized
for manufacturing purposes, and mills are found along all the streams
in this part of the state. The location of Paterson as a manufacturing
center is due to the water power developed from the Passaic Falls. At
Trenton, water power is secured from the rapids of the Delaware River.
In the northern part of the state, several streams and lakes are used
to provide electric power and light.

Closely connected with drainage systems and dependent largely upon them
are the methods of supplying water to the people of towns and cities
for domestic purposes. Formerly water for such purposes was obtained
from near-by springs, wells, and streams. As population increased,
the local sources of water supply became contaminated and dangerous
to health. This danger and the larger quantity of water required by
the increased population and by manufacturing interests have forced
the larger cities to make provision for securing their water supply
from sources, more or less remote, which are not subject to pollution.
Their water-supply systems include pumping stations, reservoirs for
storage, and long pipe lines. The drainage basins from which water is
taken for municipal purposes are located in the thinly populated parts
of the state. The northern mountainous section, which is not specially
profitable for agriculture and other purposes, is particularly useful
in furnishing sources of water supply. The many large cities in the
northern part of the state draw their water from the upper parts of the
Hackensack, Passaic, and Raritan basins. Formerly Newark and Jersey
City drew their water from the Passaic River not far above the former
city. This river was gradually so polluted by the sewage and the waste
of factories discharged into it, that it had to be abandoned as a
source of supply. These cities now bring their water long distances,
Newark using the Pequannock basin, and Jersey City the Rockaway. In
some cases water is obtained from artesian wells.

The pollution of streams by city sewers and drains from factories
destroys fish in fresh-water streams. The damage extends even into
tidal waters, and many oyster and clam fisheries in the bays have
been abandoned. The state is alive to the necessity of protecting its
streams against contamination of all kinds and has enacted legislation
designed to maintain their purity by preventing the flow of sewage
and other objectionable matter into them. It has provided for the
construction of a trunk-line sewer along the valley of the Passaic from
Paterson to the sea, into which the sewers of the cities along its
course will be discharged. In cooperation with Pennsylvania the state
has passed laws to prevent the pollution of the Delaware River.




PLANTS AND ANIMALS


=Forests.=--When the state was first settled it was covered with a vast
primeval forest, consisting of pine, oak, maple, chestnut, hickory,
ash, walnut, tulip, poplar, and cedar. For many years lumbering was
an important industry, but it ceased a long time ago, after the best
timber had been cut down. In the northern part of the state, where
agriculture is difficult or impossible, the mountains are still covered
with forests which promise to be of great value in the future. In the
southern part, the section called "The Pines" is covered with stunted
pines mingled with scrub oak. In all parts of the state are isolated
forested areas of varied extent. About forty per cent of the total land
surface of the state is covered with forest growth.

Until a very recent period no organized efforts were made to protect
forest trees against forest fires or other destructive agencies, or
to provide for reforestation. The state has, however, realized the
commercial value of its forests and the importance of promoting their
growth on lands that are not available for farming purposes. The
state has also recognized the value of forests in preventing floods
(Secs. 93, 136, 224). In recent years an additional reason for forest
protection is the necessity of preserving the soils of the forested
areas in the drainage basins from which the cities obtain their supply
of water, so that by the storage of water in the soils and underlying
rock strata the supply may at all times be constant and sufficient.
The use of trees for shade and wind breaks and their natural beauty
also justify their protection and care. For these reasons the state has
adopted legislation which provides for the growth of trees and forests.
It owns and maintains six forest reserves located in different parts
of the state, containing nearly 14,000 acres, which are being devoted
to forest culture. It has authorized the counties to create extensive
parks and has provided for the diffusion of important information
regarding the care of forests. It maintains lookout stations from which
forest fires may be detected, and a force of firewardens to prevent or
extinguish fires and to arrest those who cause them. This state and
New York, acting together, have created the Palisades Interstate Park,
which embraces thousands of acres of forest land in the latter state
and the Palisades for a distance of twelve miles along the Hudson in
New Jersey.

[Illustration: Shipping tomatoes, Swedesboro]

=Animals.=--The larger wild animals have practically disappeared,
although the red deer is still frequently found in the northern and
southern parts of the state because of the protection afforded this
animal by the laws. Here are, also, still many of the smaller animals,
such as the rabbit and squirrel. In many parts of the state wild ducks
and quail are numerous.

The fresh-water streams and lakes abound in bass, trout, pickerel, and
perch. In the spring the shad fisheries along the Delaware are very
profitable. The catch of sturgeon is also very large. All these waters
are constantly restocked by means of the hatcheries near Hackettstown
which the state maintains. The shad fisheries of the Hudson were
formerly extensive, but owing chiefly to destructive methods of fishing
and to the pollution of the river this industry has practically
disappeared.

The sheltered bays and inlets of the state and the nearness of the
fisheries to the markets have made the salt water fisheries very
successful. Bluefish and weakfish for food, and menhaden for oil and
fertilizer are caught along the coast in large quantities, while
in the bays and coves immense quantities of oysters and clams are
gathered. Important centers of this industry are Keyport, Barnegat Bay,
Tuckerton, Absecon, Maurice River Cove, and Bivalve.




AGRICULTURE


=Soils.=--In the northern part of the state the sides of the higher
mountains are steep and are in many places denuded of soil. In the
valleys and on the hills north of the terminal moraine the soil
consists largely of glacial drift, which is composed of clay, sand,
and gravel mixed with bowlders. This soil is fertile, but a large part
of it is not easy to cultivate, because of the large stones in It and
because of the rugged surface. South of the terminal moraine, in the
Highlands and in the Piedmont Plateau, the soil is composed of gravel
and sand washed down by streams from the glacial deposits farther north
and of disintegrated underlying rocks, which in the Highlands consisted
largely of gneiss and in the Piedmont Plateau of sandstones and shales.
The soil of the Coastal Plain consists of extensive deposits of gravel,
sand, clay, and marl deposited in the ocean, which once covered this
region. The gravel, sand, and clay were carried into it by the streams
which flowed from the north. The marl consists largely of very small
shells of animals that lived in the sea. This mixed soil is very
fertile, particularly that in which there is an abundance of marl. This
is found in the "Marl Belt," which is a strip of land extending from
the Atlantic Highlands southwest past Trenton and Mount Holly as far
as Salem. Its width varies, being widest at its northeastern end and
becoming narrower and less rich in marl toward the southwest. Formerly
marl was used extensively as a fertilizer to enrich poorer soils, but
it has been generally displaced by the richer commercial fertilizers.
The so-called "Pine Barrens" which cover a large part of the Plain,
east of the Marl Belt, are comparatively unproductive, but by proper
cultivation and the application of fertilizers, these areas can be made
very productive.

[Illustration: Gathering peaches, New Jersey]

=Crops.=--In the production of grain crops the state cannot, on account
of its varied surface and its small farms, compete with the western
states with their great plains and large farms. Wheat is produced
mainly for local consumption. Corn is grown in large quantities
in all parts of the state. Rye and buckwheat are also raised in
limited quantities. Much of the land, particularly that which is not
adapted to the growth of other crops, is devoted to pasture and hay.
Many circumstances are extremely favorable to special agricultural
industries whose products are vegetables, fruits, flowers, poultry,
eggs, milk, and butter. These are: the climate, with its mild winters
and generous rainfall; the fertility of the soil; the large permanent
population of the state; the presence of thousands of visitors from
other states at the summer resorts of the state; the nearness of
the farm lands of the state to the great cities of New York and
Philadelphia; and the excellent facilities for the rapid transportation
of agricultural products to the markets.

The constant demand of the large cities makes market gardening very
profitable, and this industry is carried on in all parts of the state,
but with special intensity in those sections which are near the cities.
All kinds of vegetables are raised. Of these the potato crop is the
most valuable. In the southern counties, which have a sandy soil, large
crops of sweet potatoes are produced. This section is also prominent
in the cultivation of tomatoes, beans, and peas, great quantities of
which are used in the canning industry. Cabbages, celery, and onions
are valuable products. The demand for fresh, early vegetables has
encouraged market gardeners to devote increased attention to growing
vegetables under glass.

Fruits of all kinds are raised in all parts of the state. In the
northwestern section of the state, in parts of Warren, Morris, and
Hunterdon counties, peaches are grown in great quantities on the stony
soil of the glacial drift which is not favorable to general farming. In
the western section apples and pears are abundant. While strawberries,
blackberries, raspberries, and grapes are grown in all parts of the
state, they are grown in special abundance in the southern part of the
state. In this section establishments for the bottling of unfermented
grape juice have grown up. Huckleberries are common in the wooded
sections of the northern and southern parts of the state. Cranberry
bogs are found in Atlantic, Burlington, and Ocean counties.

[Illustration: Poultry buildings, New Jersey Experimental Station, New
Brunswick]

=Animal Products.=--Dairy farming is successful in all parts of the
state, particularly in the sections in which pasture and hay are easily
obtained, and in which facilities for the prompt transportation of milk
to the cities are at hand. Milk is produced not only by the general
farmer but also by special dairy farms, which, by devoting special
attention to the care and feeding of cattle and to the handling of
the milk, produce milk of a superior quality. Poultry raising and the
production of eggs are profitable. The poultry industry is especially
extensive in Cumberland, Atlantic, and Ocean counties.

With the increase in the population of the cities the farm land of the
state is growing in extent and value, but it is clear that more rapid
growth is possible and desirable. The State Agricultural School at
Rutgers College, with Its Experiment Station and practical courses of
instruction, is doing much to improve agriculture in New Jersey.

[Illustration: A dairy farm in Middlesex County. Corn for silage is
growing in front of the buildings]




MINERALS


Iron ore is found in many parts of the state. The mines of Morris
County in the Highlands are the most productive. Iron ore was smelted
at Shrewsbury in the seventeenth century by Colonel Lewis Morris, and
in many places at the time of the Revolution. The iron industry of the
state was most extensive and successful during the third quarter of the
last century. The greater abundance and richness of western ores has
since made it impossible to operate most of the mines and furnaces
of Warren and Morris counties profitably. The industry has therefore
declined. A few mines are still worked, however, in these two counties.
Very rich zinc mines are located in Sussex County, in the neighborhood
of Franklin Furnace. In the production of zinc this state ranks fifth
among the states of the Union.

[Illustration: Portland cement factories near Phillipsburg]

Granite of good quality is found in the Appalachian and Highland
zones. The quarrying of this material is a rapidly growing industry.
Besides granite the sandstone of the Piedmont Plateau is widely used
for building purposes. Slate is quarried to some extent in Sussex and
Warren counties. Talc, or soapstone, which, ground into powder, is used
in making certain kinds of paper and for other purposes, is found in
Warren County. The production of cement from limestone and shale, found
in the western part of the Highlands near Phillipsburg, has grown to
be a very important industry. This industry and the quarrying of slate
are parts of the great cement and slate industries of the adjacent
section of Pennsylvania, across the Delaware, near Easton, which are
among the most important in the country. The trap rock of the Piedmont
Plateau is used for building purposes, road making, and railroad beds.
Its hardness makes it particularly valuable for macadam roads. In all
parts of the state are found deposits of sand and gravel necessary in
building operations.

The beds of marl found in the Coastal Plain have already been
mentioned. This region also contains very valuable beds of white sand
and fine clay. This sand is used in the making of glass, and has caused
the establishment of many glass factories in the southwestern part
of the state. Molding sand is also found in great quantity. The most
extensive beds of clay are found in Mercer and Middlesex counties. In
the former they are used in the making of pottery and in the latter
in the making of brick, terra cotta, tile, and other clay products.
The enormous industries of Trenton and of Perth Amboy and its vicinity
are due to the presence of these clays. For the finer pottery, clays
brought from other states or countries are used. Much clay is shipped
from this state to other states.

[Illustration: Pottery works, Trenton]

=Manufacturing.=--New Jersey is an important manufacturing state.
In this state the manufacturing industries have been developed in a
remarkable degree by a combination of conditions and causes. Very
early in the history of New Jersey the people of the state were forced
by their own needs and the demands of their neighbors to establish
manufacturing, and thus this industry has the advantage of many years
of growth. The state is rich in certain important natural resources,
which have been mentioned. It has profited greatly by its nearness to
the coal and iron fields of Pennsylvania and to the two great cities of
New York and Philadelphia, with their enormous demands for manufactured
products. The number of intelligent and skillful workers in the state
is unusually large. The facilities for rapid transportation, both of
raw materials from all sources and of finished products to all markets,
are unusually abundant. The navigable waters which fringe the state,
and the transcontinental railroad systems with their branches, which
cross it, facilitate shipments to every part of the world.

Among the most important manufactures of New Jersey are refined copper,
silk and silk goods, foundry and machine shop products, petroleum
products, packed meats, woolen and felt goods, wire, leather and
leather goods, electrical machinery, tobacco manufactures, chemicals,
and ships. (See Table II for other manufactures.)

[Illustration: Warping silk, silk mills, Paterson]

[Illustration: Weaving silk, Paterson]

Nearly one sixth of the people of the state are engaged in the
manufacturing industries. Only four states, Massachusetts, Rhode
Island, Connecticut, and New Hampshire, show a larger proportion of
workers engaged in manufacturing. Although New Jersey is forty-fifth in
area and ninth in population, this state is sixth in the total value of
manufactured goods, first in the manufacture of silk and silk goods, in
the smelting and refining of copper, in the manufacture of oil cloth
and linoleum and of sewing machines, second in the manufacture of
chemicals, rubber goods, pottery, terra cotta, and fine clay products,
and of paint and varnish, third in the manufacture of electrical
machinery and supplies, and fourth in the manufacture of soap and gold
and silver articles.




TRAVEL AND TRANSPORTATION


In the early days of the state communication between the settlements
was by Indian trails, which, as travel increased, expanded into roads.
Settlements on the coast were also connected by sailing vessels. The
roads gradually increased in number and length as the interior of the
state was developed. Little effort was made, however, toward keeping
the public roads in good condition. The difficulties of travel and
transportation led to the construction of many "turnpikes," or roads
built by private companies, which charged tolls for their use. With
very few exceptions these have been made public roads.

In the early part of the nineteenth century the foundations of
transportation by steamboat, canals, and railroads were laid. The
Morris Canal, from Phillipsburg to Jersey City, was projected and
constructed to bring anthracite coal from Pennsylvania to the iron
forges of northern New Jersey and to New York Bay, and to connect
the towns along its route with the city of New York. The Delaware and
Raritan Canal, from Bordentown to New Brunswick, the Camden and Amboy
Railroad, and the New Jersey Railroad were constructed in order to
increase transportation facilities between Philadelphia and New York
harbor. Now all parts of the state are connected with each other and
with those great centers by many railroad lines. The importance of
our railroads has been much increased by the development of the West
and by the geographical location of the state in the path of direct
communication between the western states and the city of New York. All
the trunk lines from the Middle West, with one exception, pass through
New Jersey, and have terminals in Jersey City, Hoboken, and Weehawken.
The state has 2464 miles of railroad, a greater mileage compared
with its area than any other state. Besides, there are 1294 miles of
electric railway which traverse all parts of the state and connect all
important points.

[Illustration: Oil refinery and tanks, Elizabethport]

Because of the superior advantages of railroads, the canals are now
obsolete, the Morris Canal being practically abandoned. The traffic
between New York and Philadelphia is growing so rapidly that it is
probable that the Delaware and Raritan Canal may be widened and
deepened and thus may become a barge or ship canal.

Communication with Pennsylvania over the Delaware is by means of many
ferries and bridges. There is no bridge between New Jersey and New York
over the Hudson, but the construction of one has been proposed. Until
1908 the only means of communication was by ferries. The Pennsylvania
Railroad now enters New York by tunnels extending from the Hackensack
meadows to its terminal in the city, and Jersey City and Hoboken are
also connected with New York by tunnels. In cooperation with the State
of New York, New Jersey has provided for the construction of a tunnel
for vehicles between Jersey City and New York, and, in cooperation
with Pennsylvania, of a bridge over the Delaware between Camden and
Philadelphia.

The state is noted for its excellent roads. The state and
municipalities are spending vast sums of money on their construction
and maintenance. Funds for state roads, which are in charge of a State
Highway Commission, are obtained from the issuance of automobile
licenses and from a special road tax.




RECREATION AND HEALTH


New Jersey is rich in its facilities for recreation and recuperation.
The long sea coast is one long line of attractive summer resorts, which
are famous all over the world, while some places are pleasure and
health resorts all the year round, and attractions of a different kind
are found in abundance among the mountains, woods, lakes, and streams
of the northern part of the state.

Under authority given by state law the counties and cities have
provided many parks and playgrounds and have adopted progressive plans
for extending these healthful provisions.

[Illustration: The Board Walk, Atlantic City]

The state has adopted stringent measures regarding sanitation,
protection against disease, protection against injury in manufacturing,
housing conditions, safety in travel, protection of minors in
permissible occupations, and the segregation and treatment of the
tuberculous. State laws provide for the payment of damages to persons
injured in the industries, and of pensions to dependent widows.

The salt marshes are a menace to health and comfort because they are
breeding places for mosquitoes. The counties are authorized by law to
spend large sums of money for the purpose of destroying these pests.




GOVERNMENT AND EDUCATION


=Government.=--The Constitution of New Jersey divides the government
into three departments,--legislative, executive, and judicial. The
legislative department is vested in the legislature, which is composed
of the senate and the general assembly. The senate is composed of one
senator from each county, elected by the voters for three years. The
general assembly is composed of sixty assemblymen apportioned among
the counties according to population and elected by the voters for one
year. The executive power is vested in the governor, who is elected for
a term of three years. A person cannot be governor for two successive
terms. The judicial power is vested in many courts, of which the
principal are the court of errors and appeals, which is the highest
court, court of chancery, supreme court, circuit court, and courts of
common pleas or county courts. The judges are appointed by the governor
with the approval of the senate.

[Illustration: State Capitol, Trenton]

The principal state officers, besides the governor, are secretary of
state, state treasurer, state comptroller, and attorney-general.

The state is divided into twenty-one counties, which are again divided
into townships, cities, boroughs, and towns. Each of these has its
own government, which is administered in accordance with laws passed
by the legislature. The principal county officers besides the judge
are sheriff, county clerk, surrogate, coroner, county collector, and
members of the board of freeholders who are elected by vote of the
people.

The counties maintain courthouses, penitentiaries, farms or homes for
the aged poor, and may provide parental homes or detention homes for
juvenile delinquents or juvenile witnesses.

The state is represented in the United States Congress by two senators
and twelve representatives.

[Illustration: State Normal, Montclair

State Normal, Trenton

State Normal, Newark]

=Education.=--The Constitution requires that "the legislature shall
provide for the maintenance and support of a thorough and efficient
system of free public schools for the instruction" of the children of
the state. It is because of this requirement and the desire of the
people to enforce it that the state has such excellent schools.

The principal officers of the state department of public instruction
are the members of the state board of education, the commissioner
of education, and four assistant commissioners. Each county has a
county superintendent of schools, and each city and large town has its
own board of education and superintendent of schools or supervising
principal.

[Illustration: Nassua Hall, Princeton University]

In the school year 1919-1920 the number of pupils who attended the
public schools was 591,798. The number of teachers was 18,873. Because
of good schools and of compulsory school attendance, there were in
1910, only 113,502 illiterates, or persons of ten years of age and over
who could not read or write, or 5.6 per cent of the total population.
Of these illiterates, 93,000 were of foreign birth and less than one
per cent were of native white parentage.

State normal schools for the training of teachers are located at
Trenton, Montclair, Newark, and Glassboro. City normal schools are
maintained for the same purpose by Jersey City, Paterson, Trenton,
and Camden. The state maintains summer schools for the preparation of
teachers and makes appropriations to the State Agricultural College,
a department of Rutgers College at New Brunswick. Special schools
maintained by the state are: Farnum School, at Beverly, which is
associated with the Trenton Normal School; the School for the Deaf at
Trenton; and the Manual Training and Industrial School for Colored
Youths at Bordentown. Higher institutions of learning which are located
in New Jersey are: Princeton University at Princeton, Rutgers College
at New Brunswick, Stevens Institute of Technology at Hoboken, St.
Peter's College at Jersey City, College of St. Elizabeth at Convent
Station, Mount St. Mary's College at Plainfield, Drew Theological
Seminary at Madison, Seton Hall College at South Orange, Upsala College
at Kenilworth, Bloomfield Theological Seminary at Bloomfield, and
College of Jersey City.

[Illustration: The metropolitan district including northeastern New
Jersey and southeastern New York]




POPULATION


The population of New Jersey in 1910, according to the United States
Census, was 2,537,168; and the density of population, or the number of
people per square mile, was 337.7. In 1920, according to the United
States Census, the population was 3,155,900, an increase of 24.4 per
cent., giving a density of 420. Compared with other states. New Jersey
was tenth in population, and third in density of population, Rhode
Island being first and Massachusetts second. The area of greatest
density of population is the northeastern section, including Bergen,
Hudson, Passaic, Essex, Union, and Middlesex counties, which with an
area of 1018 square miles had a population of 2,112,933, or more than
sixty-five per cent, of the total population of the state. In this
section there were more than 2000 persons per square mile. Hudson
County, the smallest in the state, had the largest population, which
was 629,124 or 14,630 per square mile. In Hoboken, with an area of
less than two square miles, the population was more than 68,000 or
more than 34,000 to the square mile. Other thickly populated sections
are those of which Trenton and Camden are centers. Cape May County had
the smallest and Ocean County the most scattered population, which was
22,155 or 35 per square mile.

The urban population, that is, the number residing in towns of more
than 2500 people, was 2,486,378 in 1920, or 79 per cent, of the total
population. This still leaves a rural population of 669,522, or about
90 per square mile, who are largely engaged in cultivation of the soil
or the raising of stock.

The chief occupations of the people of the state are agriculture,
fishing, manufacturing, and commerce. Many thousands of people of New
Jersey are engaged in commercial and industrial enterprises and other
business pursuits, in the large cities of the neighboring states. Many
opportunities for comfortable residence with all conveniences and
advantages and unsurpassed facilities for rapidly traveling back and
forth attract many to this state who are employed in the cities of New
York and Philadelphia.

[Illustration: Population of New Jersey]

According to the United States Census of 1920 the population of the
New York City Metropolitan District was 7,750,237. Included in this
district are the cities and towns in Hudson County and in parts
of Bergen, Passaic, Essex, Union, and Middlesex counties, with a
population of 1,795,590. In the Metropolitan District of Philadelphia,
with a population of over 2,000,000, are parts of Burlington, Camden,
and Gloucester counties with a population of 239,740. It is clear,
therefore, that the occupations of two thirds of our people, at least,
are subject to the direct influence of the commercial and industrial
activities of these cities. (The United States Census Bureau defines a
Metropolitan District as that which embraces the central city and all
cities or parts of cities which lie within ten miles of its boundaries.)

[Illustration: Broad and Market Streets, Newark]




CITIES, TOWNS, BOROUGHS, AND VILLAGES


The cities, towns, boroughs, and villages of New Jersey may be placed
in six groups: first, those in the New York City Metropolitan District;
second, places lying just outside the Metropolitan District of New
York; third, Trenton and the towns of the Upper Delaware Valley;
fourth, places in the Philadelphia Metropolitan District; fifth, places
in the southern part of the state, near Delaware Bay; sixth, cities and
towns on the Atlantic coast.

=Metropolitan District of New York.=--The following are the chief
cities of New Jersey in the Metropolitan District of New York: Newark,
Jersey City, Hoboken, Bayonne, Paterson, Elizabeth, and Perth Amboy.

=Newark and its Environs.=--Newark, in 1910, had a population of
347,469 and in 1920 of 414,216. It is the largest city in the state
and fifteenth in the United States. It was settled in 1666 by settlers
from Connecticut. It is located on the Passaic River and Newark Bay
and has a frontage on the river and bay of eleven miles. It has water
communication with New York Bay by way of Newark Bay and Kill van Kull.
The United States government has dredged a channel in the bay three
hundred fifty feet wide by twenty feet deep. This great improvement
and improvements made by the city at great expense will greatly
increase the commerce of the city. The city enjoys excellent railroad
facilities. Nine railroads including the great trunk lines have
fourteen stations in the city. It is directly connected with the city
of New York by passenger trains which pass through the Hudson tunnels.
It has numerous banks, fine office buildings, and large department
stores. Many trolley lines which radiate from it bring to it the trade
of the many neighboring cities.

Newark is the first city in the state in the variety of its
manufactures and in the value of its manufactured products. It is
eleventh among the cities of the United States in the value of such
products. Its great progress in manufactures is due to an early start,
to the stimulus given by the opening of the Morris Canal and by
railroad and water transportation. It has a large number of important
industries which include smelting and refining, the making of shoes,
leather goods of all kinds, hats, jewelry, iron, steel, and brass
products of all kinds, watch cases, paints and varnishes, clothing,
electrical machinery and appliances, automobile supplies, tinware,
advertising novelties, celluloid products, trunks, fertilizers, furs,
brewery products, and cigars.

[Illustration: Storage-battery factory, West Orange]

Newark has an excellent supply of water which is drawn from the valley
of the Pequannock River in the northern part of the Passaic basin,
twenty-six miles from the city.

Surrounding Newark are many important cities and towns which reflect
the social, commercial, and industrial influences of that city as
well as those of New York. Among these are =Belleville=, =Nutley=,
=Montclair=, =Glen Ridge=, =Bloomfield=, =Orange=, =East Orange=,
=West Orange=, =South Orange=, =Irvington=, and =Summit=. These are
all largely residential towns whose location and abundance of eligible
sites for homes are attractive. They are all exceptionally active in
providing educational facilities. They are all closely connected with
Newark and the city of New York by many railroad and trolley lines.
In most of them land is in such demand for residential purposes, that
it cannot be used profitably for manufacturing purposes, so that
this industry is naturally discouraged. In some of them, however,
especially those nearest to Newark, large industrial establishments
have grown up. =Belleville=, just north of Newark, has long been noted
for its industrial activity and is rapidly growing in importance in
this respect. Nutley, farther to the north, is well known as a town
of beautiful homes. =Montclair=, located on the slope of the Orange
Mountains, is noted for its beautiful scenery, its commanding view of
many square miles of surrounding country with many populous cities, and
its multitude of beautiful homes, and is the home of one of the state
normal schools. =Glen Ridge= and =Bloomfield=, similarly situated,
are also characterized by their fine dwellings. Bloomfield contains
many extensive manufacturing establishments. Among the products are
electrical lamps and appliances, woolen and worsted goods, colored
labels, cream separators, chemicals, rubber goods, and iron and steel
products. Besides being an attractive center for residences. =Orange=
is a very productive industrial center. Its principal industry is
the manufacture of hats. =East Orange= has long been famous because
of its superior attractiveness for dwelling purposes and is filled
with beautiful homes. While the high cost of land does not invite
manufactures, several large industries are located here. Electrical
motors and generators, surgical appliances, electrical appliances,
machinery, lamps, and hats are manufactured in large quantities.
=West Orange= is noted for the manufacture of phonographs, phonograph
records, moving picture instruments and films, and storage batteries.
Hats are also extensively manufactured. =South Orange= and =Summit=
are most attractive residential places, and are developing rapidly
along this line rather than in the line of manufactures. Summit has
an important silk industry. =Irvington=, while long known as a town
devoted to residences, is feeling the industrial impulse of Newark,
of which it is a suburb, and is rapidly becoming a manufacturing
center of great importance. Its industries are varied and include the
production of castings, graphite products, tools, cutlery, and gold,
silver, and platinum products. Across the Passaic River from Newark
are =East Newark=, =Harrison=, and =Kearney=, the last including
=Arlington=. These municipalities are located in Hudson County and are,
therefore, officially connected with Jersey City as its county seat.
But they are much nearer Newark, with which they are closely connected
by industrial and commercial ties. They are prosperous manufacturing
centers with industries of national importance. In =East Newark= the
most important manufactures are sewing thread and shade rollers. In
Harrison the industries are varied and the products include iron and
steel, incandescent lamps, steam pumps, roller bearings, elevators,
steel and tin toys, electric wire, trunks, brass products, tools,
metal novelties, castings, and machinery. In =Kearney= the important
manufactures are linoleums, yarns, twine, glue, oils, fertilizers,
ships, and castings.

[Illustration: Jersey City as seen from the Hudson]

=Jersey City and its Environs.=--A long narrow peninsula lies between
the Hudson River and New York Bay on the east, and the Hackensack
River and Newark Bay on the west. On this peninsula are located many
prosperous cities. On the southern half, which is in Hudson County, is
found the most densely populated part of the state, with many large
cities of great industrial and commercial importance.

=Jersey City=, the largest of this group, had, in 1910, a population of
267,779, and in 1920, according to the United States Census, 297,864.
It is the second city of the state in size, and twenty-first in the
United States. Parts of it were occupied by the Dutch soon after New
York was settled, but the first permanent government was established
in 1660 at Bergen, which is now a part of the city. Here were also
established the first school and the first church in the state. It is
located on New York Bay and the Hudson River and extends westward from
these waters to Newark Bay and the Hackensack River. It has a frontage
on tidal waters of about twelve miles and has therefore unexcelled
facilities for transportation by vessels of any size to all the
seaports of the world. Thirteen railroads have terminals in the city.
Besides these, there are eleven other passenger and freight stations
in the city. Here the railroads bring the products of all parts of the
country directly to the ships which sail to all parts of the world.

The city is connected directly with the city of New York by railroads
which pass through tunnels under the Hudson. Numerous trolley lines
connect the different parts of the city with each other and with other
parts of the state. There are nineteen banks and trust companies.
In manufacturing, Jersey City ranks second in the state. Its great
commercial and industrial growth is due to its nearness to New York, to
its connection with that city by ferries and railroad tunnels, by which
passengers and freight are carried to the heart of the city of New York
in a few minutes, and to the abundance of facilities for all kinds of
transportation. The most important products are sugar, printers' type,
soaps and perfumes, meats, silks and embroideries, graphite products,
lead pencils, tobacco, cigars, iron, steel and brass products, fire
hose, rubber goods, soups, watches, chemicals, electrical supplies,
heating and lighting apparatus, rope, and paints and varnishes.

The water used by the city is of excellent quality and is brought from
the basin of the Rockaway River in the northern part of the state. The
city has eight municipal parks and one county park, containing nearly
two hundred fifty acres. The city maintains a normal school for the
training of its teachers and has an excellent public library.

Besides being an active industrial center it is a residential city.
Many thousands whose occupations are in the city of New York live in
Jersey City.

North of Jersey City and adjacent to it is =Hoboken=. It is the most
densely populated city in the state. It has connections with several
railroads, and one of the great trunk lines has its terminal station
here. The steamships of several of the most important transatlantic
lines, including Scandinavian and Dutch, dock in Hoboken. Hoboken is
connected with the city of New York by the Hudson River tunnels and by
ferries and with other cities of the state by many trolley lines. Its
manufacturing industries include shipbuilding and repairing and the
making of lead pencils, surveying and nautical instruments, marine
engines and boilers, silk goods, furniture, and wall paper. Here is
located the well-known Stevens Institute of Technology.

North of Hoboken and Jersey City are several cities and towns which
are very important industrially and are rapidly growing in population.
Their nearness to these cities and to each other makes their industries
and interests similar. These are =West Hoboken=, =Union=, =West New
York=, =North Bergen=, =Weehawken=, =Guttenberg=, and =Secaucus=. These
are all populous and thriving communities. There are many valuable
industries, among which the manufacture of silks and embroideries is
the most important. This section leads the state in the manufacture
of embroideries and is second only to Paterson in that of silk goods.
Other industries are machine shops, marine construction, and the
manufacture of pianos, lamps, lard, and rubber goods. In =Secaucus=
vegetable gardening is important.

South of Jersey City lies the city of =Bayonne=, which is the third
city of the state in the value of manufactured products. Its frontage
on New York Bay on the east, Newark Bay on the west, and Kill van
Kull on the south, gives it exceptional facilities for deep-water
transportation. It has, besides, ample railroad facilities. It is the
most important center for the refining of petroleum in the world.
The oil is brought in pipe lines from the oil fields of Pennsylvania
and Ohio to the refineries, from which the many refined products are
carried to all parts of the world. There are many other extensive
industries, of which the following may be mentioned: the manufacturing
of steam boilers, iron, steel, and bronze products, cottonseed oil,
nickel and copper products, borax, insulated wire, and silk goods.

The northern part of the peninsula, which is in Bergen County, contains
many attractive towns which are largely residential in character. Among
them are =Englewood= and =Fort Lee=. =Edgewater= on the Hudson at the
foot of the Palisades has important industries. The chief products are
sugar and sirups.

=Paterson and Neighboring Cities and Towns.=--Paterson, located at the
Falls of the Passaic River, had a population in 1920 of 135,866 and
is the third city of the state in size. The founding of the city was
suggested by Alexander Hamilton, who foresaw the value of the power
generated by the falls and made plans to use it for manufacturing
purposes. Its great growth as a manufacturing center is largely due to
this power. In the value of its manufactures, it is the fifth among the
cities of the state. Its most important industry is the manufacture of
silk products of all kinds. In this industry it stands first among the
cities of the country. It has many other extensive industrial plants,
which include machine shops, foundries, rolling mills, locomotive
works, dyeing establishments, and thread and cordage mills.

=Passaic=, located on the Passaic River a few miles southeast of
Paterson, is specially noted for its manufacture of woolen and worsted
goods, in which it is the first city of the state. It has other
extensive industries, including the manufacture of handkerchiefs
and other cotton goods, rubber goods, belting and packing material,
machinery, metal, leather and silk goods, and print and chemical works.
Passaic is, besides, an attractive residential city.

[Illustration: Docks at Hoboken. The principal port of embarkation and
debarkation of United States troops in the World War]

Northeast of Passaic is =Hackensack= on the Hackensack River, which
is a prosperous residential town. Between Paterson and Passaic are
=Clifton=, a growing manufacturing town, =Lodi=, with its extensive
dyeing industry, and =Garfield= with its large establishments for the
manufacture of woolen and worsted goods, waxed paper, embroideries,
and yarns. Southwest of Paterson is =Little Falls=, whose principal
manufactures are carpets and rugs. =Rutherford=, =Hasbrouck Heights=,
=Ridgewood=, and =Westwood= are towns in this section which are
specially inviting to residents.

=Elizabeth and Neighboring Towns.=--Elizabeth is one of the oldest
towns in the state. It was settled in 1664 and was the residence of
Sir Philip Carteret, the first Governor of New Jersey. It is most
favorably situated for both manufacturing and residential purposes. Its
location on Arthur Kill and Newark Bay gives it deep water connection
through Kill van Kull with New York Bay, and it has besides ample
railroad facilities. It has many industries, the largest of which, and
the largest of its kind in the world, is the manufacture of sewing
machines. Other industries are the manufacture of iron and steel
products of all kinds, and of electrical appliances, tanning, printing,
and shipbuilding. It has always been popular as a place of residence
with many whose business is in New York.

=Rahway=, a few miles southwest of Elizabeth, is a flourishing city
whose chief industries are the manufacture of felt, cereals, steel
products, clothing, music boxes, and printing and book binding.
=Roselle=, =Roselle Park=, =Cranford=, and =Westfield= are attractive
residential towns west of Elizabeth, with excellent educational
facilities. =Garwood=, in this vicinity, is an important manufacturing
town.

=Perth Amboy and Neighboring Towns.=--Perth Amboy was settled in 1684
and alternated with Burlington as the meeting place of the New Jersey
assembly after the union of the provinces in 1702. Its great industrial
activity has increased its population by more than 100 per cent in the
last fifteen years. Its rapid industrial growth is due to its location
at the mouth of the Raritan River and on Raritan Bay and Arthur Kill,
as well as to its railroad facilities, and to the extensive deposits
of clay which are found here. The development of these has led to the
establishment of large manufacturing plants whose products are terra
cotta, earthenware, and tile of all kinds. Other important industries
are the refining of gold, silver, copper, and lead, the preparation of
vaseline, boat building, the shipping of coal, and the manufacture of
cigars, insulated wire, chemicals, and steel products. It is the fourth
city in the state in the value of manufactured products.

Near Perth Amboy are =Metuchen=, =Woodbridge=, =South Amboy=,
=Sayreville=, and =South River=, which are populous towns and have
extensive industries similar to those of Perth Amboy. In =Woodbridge=
the output of fire brick is specially important. In =Sayreville= and
=South River= special attention is given to the manufacture of building
brick. In all there is considerable shipping of clays to other points.
Many varied industries are found in Carteret to the northeast of
Woodbridge.

=Places on the Outskirts of the Metropolitan District of New
York.=--Lying just beyond the New York City Metropolitan District, yet
feeling its influence more and more as the facilities for communication
are increased, are a number of important towns.

=Morristown=, in Morris County, is famous because of Its Revolutionary
associations. It is distinctively a residential town, which possesses
great municipal and educational advantages. =Madison= is another
residential town, whose peculiar and most important industry is the
cultivation of roses. =Boonton= and =Dover= have picturesque locations
and are industrially active. Their chief products are boilers,
furnaces, hosiery, iron, hats, and silk goods.

In Union County is =Plainfield=, which is well known on account of its
residential advantages, its unexcelled schools, and its industrial
importance. Its principal manufactures are printing presses, electrical
appliances, garments, machine tools, and machine shop products. =North
Plainfield= is a residential suburb.

=Somerville= is an attractive and prosperous town with industries which
manufacture clothing, laces, and iron pipe. =Bound Brook= is at the
junction of three trunk line railroads and is located on the Raritan
Canal. It is therefore an active industrial center. At =Finderne=,
between Somerville and Bound Brook, are large asbestos works.

=New Brunswick=, which was built up about the ferry established here in
1697, is situated on the Raritan River and at the eastern end of the
Raritan Canal, and enjoys superior facilities for water and railroad
transportation. Its most extensive industry is the manufacture of
surgical dressings. Other manufactured products are machinery, woolen
goods, iron and steel products, automobiles, cigars, and wall paper.
Here is situated Rutgers College, which includes the State Agricultural
College and Experiment Station. The State Home for Boys is located at
=Jamesburg=. =Keyport=, with its fisheries and growing manufacturing
industries, is situated on lower New York Bay and has rail and water
connections with that city. =Freehold= is always associated with the
battle of Monmouth. It has important canning and rug-making industries.

=Trenton and the Towns of the Upper Delaware Valley.=--Trenton, the
capital of the state since 1790, was settled about 1679. Here occurred
the Battle of Trenton, which is commemorated by an imposing monument.
It is situated on the Delaware at the head of navigation. The Delaware
and Raritan Canal passes through the city. It thus has the advantage
of transportation by water and railway. The water power developed by
the Falls of the Delaware encouraged the establishment and growth of
the city's industries, but these have grown so extensive that they
do not rely upon it. In the neighborhood of Trenton are deposits of
clay which were the basis of the pottery industry. It has forty-eight
potteries and in this industry it is rivaled by only one city in the
United States. The local clay is now used very little. The better
grades of pottery require the finer clays which are obtained from
England, France, and some states of this country. It manufactures
more sanitary earthenware than any other city in the country. Other
extensive industries are automobile factories, iron and steel works,
machine shops, foundries, rubber works, woolen mills, watch factories,
and oilcloth and linoleum factories.

The state and city acting together have created a large public park
which extends along the Delaware River and includes the grounds around
the state capitol. The trade of the surrounding country makes the city
a thriving business center.

Northeast of Trenton is =Princeton=, memorable as the scene of the
Battle of Princeton and rich in historic associations. Here is located
Princeton University, founded in 1746.

=Lambertville=, on the Delaware northeast of Trenton, is a prosperous
town with considerable water power, whose principal industries are
rock quarries, rubber works, and canning factories. =Pennington=
and =Hopewell= in the interior are industrious canning centers. At
=Phillipsburg=, on the Delaware, opposite the mouth of the Lehigh,
five railroads meet. It is the western terminus of the Morris Canal.
These transportation facilities make it a strongly industrial town. Its
principal products are air compressors and rock drills, horseshoes,
canisters, iron pipe, boilers, and silks. The principal cement works of
the state are located near Phillipsburg. =Belvidere=, on the Delaware
above Phillipsburg; =Washington=, =Hackettstown=, and =Blairstown=, in
the interior, are popular residential towns. In =Washington= pianos
and organs, and in =Hackettstown= saws and leather, are the chief
industrial products. In =Hackettstown= and =Blairstown= well-known
educational institutions are located. =Newton= is located in the
picturesque mountain region of Sussex County. Here dairy farming is
important. Its chief manufactures are shoes, silks, and dyeing.

=Flemington= and =High Bridge=, in Hunterdon County, though not located
in the Delaware Valley, are near it. They are important centers of
trade in agricultural sections with growing industries. =High Bridge=
is in the heart of the peach-growing section and has large steel works.
So also =Franklin Furnace=, in Sussex County, is in the Wallkill Valley
and is the center of the zinc-mining industry.

=Camden and Neighboring Cities and Towns.=--In this group are included
the towns which are located in the southwestern part of the state and
which are usually considered as belonging to the Metropolitan District
of Philadelphia or are near it. All are vitally affected by its
stimulating commercial and industrial impulse.

The largest city of this group is =Camden=, on the Delaware opposite
Philadelphia, founded about 1680 and known in colonial days as
Cooper's Ferry. It shares with Philadelphia the advantages of the
deep-water route to the ocean through the Delaware River and Bay.
It owes Its first industrial impulse to the opening of the Camden
and Amboy Railroad. From It many railroads radiate to all parts
of the state and one crosses the Delaware to Pennsylvania. Direct
communication with Philadelphia is maintained by ferries. More rapid
communication will soon be obtained when the proposed tunnels under
the Delaware are completed. Its industries, which are of the most
varied character, have increased with astonishing rapidity. The most
extensive are the manufacture of talking machines and shipbuilding.
Here the largest battleships and merchant vessels can be built. One of
the shipbuilding plants is the largest in the country. Other extensive
industries are foundries, machine shops, woolen mills, chemical works,
factories for the manufacture of cigars, paints, candies, leather,
licorice, linoleum, writing pens, and the preparation of soups.

[Illustration: Canning factory, filling and capping cans, Camden]

[Illustration: Camden, Philadelphia, and vicinity]

Northeast of Camden, on the Delaware, are =Riverside= and =Beverly=,
which are important centers of manufacture and of truck farming.
Farther up is =Burlington=, which was settled in 1677 and was the
capital of West Jersey. It has ample facilities for transportation by
rail and water. Its interests are both agricultural and manufacturing.
Its principal products are shoes, iron pipe, and hardware.
=Bordentown=, the southwestern terminus of the Delaware and Raritan
Canal, also has excellent transportation facilities. Its most important
industries are the canning of vegetables and the manufacture of yarns
and clay products. In the interior, the old town. =Mount Holly=,
is rich in agricultural products and has industries which produce
hosiery, shoes, and tapestry goods. East and southeast of Camden are
=Merchantville=, =Moorestown=, =Collingswood=, and =Haddonfield=, which
are distinctively residential towns, but in which vegetable raising is
an important industry.

=Gloucester=, on the Delaware south of Camden, is a growing industrial
center. Its products are yarns, paper, and gas mantles. It has
communication with Philadelphia by ferries, which transport the produce
of the rich truck and fruit farms of the surrounding country to that
city. =Woodbury= is a prosperous residential town with industries which
make pianos and glass bottles. Next to the southward are Swedesboro,
=Glassboro=, and =Clayton=, whose principal industrial activities are
connected with the making of glass and the raising and canning of
vegetables and fruits.

=Towns near Delaware Bay.=--Farther south on the outskirts of the
Philadelphia Metropolitan District are the very active business
and industrial center, =Salem=, settled by the Quakers in 1675,
=Bridgeton=, =Vineland=, and =Millville=.

In these towns the glass factories are extensive and make all kinds
of glass articles. In =Bridgeton= and =Millville= many persons are
employed in the mining and shipping of glass sand. Molding sand is also
a product. In and surrounding these towns are large areas of farm land
devoted to the raising of all kinds of vegetables, berries, and tree
fruits for the markets. Great quantities of these are preserved in the
many large canning factories which are located in them. =Vineland=
produces much bottled grape juice. These towns have also diversified
industries of other kinds.

In =Cape May Court House= the important industrial activities are the
making of glass bottles and the raising of berries and other fruits.

=Cities and Towns on the Atlantic Coast.=--Along the Atlantic coast are
many cities and towns which are popular health and pleasure resorts.
The many railroads which connect them with the large cities have made
them convenient of access so that thousands of people visit them in the
summer time.

The largest of these is =Atlantic City=, which is the largest seaside
resort in the country and is devoted entirely to the entertainment of
visitors. It is said to contain more than one thousand hotels. Its
permanent population numbers somewhat more than 50,000, but in the
summer time its population is estimated at about 300,000. It has a
climate favorable to those who are convalescing from illness or seek to
recuperate their health. On this account it is a popular resort during
the entire year. It has a superior school system and all the other
facilities and institutions which mark the progressive city. =Long
Branch=, farther north, is the oldest resort on the coast. Another
resort of many years standing is =Cape May City=. Other well-known
resorts are =Ocean City=, =Point Pleasant=, =Sea Girt=, =Manasquan=,
=Spring Lake=, =Belmar=, =Ocean Grove=, =Asbury Park=, =Sea Bright=,
and =Atlantic Highlands=. =Red Bank=, with its many attractive country
homes, is situated on the Navesink and is classed as a seaside resort.

=Lakewood=, among the pines of Ocean County, is a popular winter health
resort.




TABLES


Table I.--References on the Geography of New Jersey

  1. Reports and other publications of the Department of
       Conservation and Development of New Jersey, including

      a. Reports of the State Geological Survey and of the State
           Geologist.

      b. The Geologic Atlas of New Jersey.

      c. Topographic Atlas, including state, geologic, and railroad
           maps.

      d. Reports of the Forest Park Reservation Commission.

      e. Reports of the State Water Supply Commission.

  2. Reports of the Palisades Interstate Park Commission.

  3. Reports of the State Board of Agriculture.

  4. The Industrial Directory of New Jersey, published by the Bureau
       of Statistics.

  5. Publications of the United States Geological Survey.

  6. Reports and bulletins of the United States Census Bureau.

  7. Publications of the United States Department of Agriculture,
       including those of the Weather Bureau.

  8. Legislative Manual, State of New Jersey.

  9. New Jersey as a Colony and as a State--Lee.

  10. A Brief History of New Jersey--Ellis and Snyder.

  11. Local histories and transactions of local historical societies.


Table II.--Leading Manufacturing Industries of New Jersey,
According to the United States Census of 1914

  ============================================================
           Industry                      |       Value of
                                         |       Products
  ---------------------------------------+---------------------
  All industries                         |    $1,406,633,414
  Smelting and refining copper           |       159,198,876
  Petroleum products                     |        90,876,993
  Silk and silk goods                    |        75,706,449
  Foundry and machine shop products      |        74,126,941
  Electrical machinery and supplies      |        40,740,810
  Slaughtering and meat packing          |        40,108,471
  Tobacco                                |        39,695,997
  Woolen, worsted, and felt goods        |        36,268,561
  Rubber goods, rubber hose, and belting |        35,798,793
  Chemicals                              |        31,686,865
  Leather                                |        31,651,831
  Dyeing and finishing textiles          |        27,986,512
  Bread and bakery products              |        25,458,216
  Cotton goods                           |        16,782,164
  Pottery, brick, tile, terra cotta      |        16,693,447
  Soap                                   |        16,692,406
  Food preparations, confec'y, chocolate |        16,529,429
  Paint and varnish                      |        16,086,717
  Printing and publishing                |        14,083,011
  Gas, illuminating and heating          |        14,020,050
  Canning and preserving                 |        13,764,955
  Copper, tin, and sheet iron products   |        12,499,728
  Lumber and timber products             |        12,482,553
  Ship and boat building                 |        11,860,965
  Clothing, men's, including shirts      |        11,547,363
  Oilcloth and linoleum                  |        11,384,311
  Jewelry                                |        11,347,455
  Boots and shoes                        |        11,204,323
  Fertilizer                             |        11,197,690
  Paper and wood pulp                    |        10,931,431
  Hats and hat materials                 |        10,569,597
  Millinery and lace                     |        10,485,723
  Oils, grease and tallow                |        10,475,379
  Iron and steel                         |        10,420,452
  Railway cars and shop products         |        10,344,659
  Gold and silver refining               |        10,078,176
  Automobiles, incl. bodies and parts    |         8,237,416
  ============================================================


Table III.--Area and Population of the Counties of New Jersey,
According to the United States Census of 1920

  +============+========+========================+========+===========+
  |            |  Area  |           |            |  Area  |           |
  |  County    | Square |Population |  County    | Square |Population |
  |            |  Miles |   1920    |            |  Miles |   1920    |
  +------------+--------+---------- | -----------+--------+-----------+
  | Atlantic   |   569  |   83,883  | Middlesex  |   312  |  162,334  |
  | Bergen     |   237  |  210,688  | Monmouth   |   479  |  104,906  |
  | Burlington |   815  |   81,770  | Morris     |   475  |   82,294  |
  | Camden     |   222  |  190,460  | Ocean      |   637  |   22,155  |
  | Cape May   |   265  |   10,460  | Passaic    |   196  |  250,148  |
  | Cumberland |   500  |   61,348  | Salem      |   343  |   36,572  |
  | Essex      |   127  |  651,807  | Somerset   |   305  |   48,015  |
  | Gloucester |   332  |   48,224  | Sussex     |   529  |   24,905  |
  | Hudson     |    43  |  620,124  | Union      |   103  |  199,832  |
  | Hunterdon  |   437  |   32,885  | Warren     |   362  |   45,057  |
  | Mercer     |   226  |  159,881  | The State  | 7,514  |3,155,900  |
  =============+========+========================+========+===========+


Table IV.--Cities, Towns, Boroughs, and Villages of New Jersey
Having 2000 or More People in 1920

  ====================================================================
  Cities, Towns, etc.|  Population |  Cities, Towns, etc.|  Population
  -------------------+------------ | --------------------+------------
  Newark             |    414,216  |  Haddonfield        |       5,646
  Jersey City        |    298,079  |  Madison            |       5,523
  Paterson           |    135,866  |  East Rutherford    |       5,463
  Trenton            |    110,289  |  Roselle Park       |       5,438
  Camden             |    110,309  |  Secaucus           |       5,423
                     |             |                     |
  Elizabeth          |     95,682  |  Boonton            |       5,372
  Bayonne            |     76,754  |  Wrightstown        |       5,288
  Hoboken            |     68,166  |  Hawthorne          |       5,135
  Passaic            |     63,824  |  Fairview           |       4,882
  East Orange        |     50,710  |  Highland Park      |       4,866
                     |             |                     |
  Atlantic City      |     50,682  |  Freehold           |       4,768
  Perth Amboy        |     41,707  |  Merchantville      |       4,754
  West Hoboken       |     40,068  |  Audubon            |       4,740
  Orange             |     33,268  |  Lambertville       |       4,660
  New Brunswick      |     32,779  |  Glen Ridge         |       4,620
                     |             |                     |
  West New York      |     29,926  |  Carlstadt          |       4,472
  Montclair          |     28,810  |  Raritan            |       4,457
  Plainfield         |     27,700  |  Keyport            |       4,415
  Kearney            |     26,724  |  Bordentown         |       4,371
  Clifton            |     26,470  |  Paulsboro          |       4,352
                     |             |                     |
  Irvington          |     25,480  |  Prospect Park      |       4,292
  Bloomfield         |     22,019  |  Newton             |       4,125
  Union              |     20,651  |  Franklin           |       4,075
  Garfield           |     19,381  |  Caldwell           |       3,993
  Hackensack         |     17,667  |  Bogota             |       3,906
                     |             |                     |
  Phillipsburg       |     16,923  |  Bergenfield        |       3,667
  Harrison           |     15,721  |  Edgewater          |       3,530
  Belleville         |     15,660  |  Haledon            |       3,435
  West Orange        |     15,573  |  Dunellen           |       3,394
  Millville          |     14,691  |  Pitman             |       3,385
                     |             |                     |
  Bridgeton          |     14,323  |  Washington         |       3,341
  Long Branch        |     13,521  |  Metuchen           |       3,334
  Morristown         |     12,548  |  East Newark        |       3,057
  Asbury Park        |     12,400  |  Verona             |       3,039
  Gloucester         |     12,162  |  Cape May           |       2,999
                     |             |                     |
  Englewood          |     11,617  |  Leonia             |       2,979
  Roosevelt          |     11,047  |  Haddon Heights     |       2,950
  Rahway             |     11,042  |  Hackettstown       |       2,936
  Summit             |     10,174  |  Wanaque            |       2,916
  Dover              |      9,817  |  Hasbrouck Heights  |       2,895
                     |             |                     |
  Rutherford         |      9,497  |  Butler             |       2,886
  Nutley             |      9,421  |  Wharton            |       2,877
  Red Bank           |      9,251  |  Wildwood           |       2,790
  Burlington         |      9,049  |  Little Ferry       |       2,715
  Westfield          |      9,026  |  Hightstown         |       2,674
                     |             |                     |
  Collingswood       |      8,714  |  Jamesburg          |       2,671
  Ridgefield Park    |      8,570  |  Rockaway           |       2,655
  Lodi               |      8,175  |  Palisades Park     |       2,633
  South Amboy        |      7,897  |  Egg Harbor         |       2,622
  Ridgewood          |      7,580  |  Westwood           |       2,597
                     |             |                     |
  Salem              |      7,435  |  Flemington         |       2,590
  South Orange       |      7,274  |  Milltown           |       2,573
  North Plainfield   |      6,916  |  Beverly            |       2,562
  Vineland           |      6,799  |  Dumont             |       2,537
  Guttenberg         |      6,726  |  Ocean City         |       2,512
                     |             |                     |
  Somerville         |      6,718  |  East Paterson      |       2,441
  South River        |      6,596  |  Chatham            |       2,421
  Hammonton          |      6,417  |  Westville          |       2,380
  Pennsgrove         |      6,060  |  Riverton           |       2,341
  Princeton          |      5,917  |  Bradley Beach      |       2,307
                     |             |                     |
  Boundbrook         |      5,906  |  Midland Park       |       2,243
  Pleasantville      |      5,887  |  Ventnor            |       2,203
  Woodbury           |      5,801  |  Bloomingdale       |       2,193
  Fort Lee           |      5,761  |  Glen Rock          |       2,181
  Roselle            |      5,737  |  Alpha              |       2,140
                     |             |                     |
  Wallington         |      5,715  |  Ramsey             |       2,090
  Cliffside Park     |      5,709  |  Pompton Lakes      |       2,008
  Tenafly            |      5,650  |                     |
  ====================================================================




       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber Note


Minor typos were corrected.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GEOGRAPHY OF NEW JERSEY ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
