The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Girl's Own Paper, Vol. XX, No. 1026,
August 26, 1899, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Girl's Own Paper, Vol. XX, No. 1026, August 26, 1899

Author: Various

Release Date: September 7, 2021 [eBook #66235]

Language: English


Produced by: Susan Skinner, Chris Curnow, Pamela Patten and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIRL'S OWN PAPER, VOL. XX, NO.
1026, AUGUST 26, 1899 ***




[Illustration: THE GIRL’S OWN PAPER

VOL. XX.—NO. 1026.]       AUGUST 26, 1899.       [PRICE ONE PENNY.]




[Illustration: “FAR FROM THE MADDING CROWD.”]

_All rights reserved._]




THE HOUSE WITH THE VERANDAH.

BY ISABELLA FYVIE MAYO, Author of “Other People’s Stairs,” “Her Object
in Life,” etc.


CHAPTER XXII.

A GREAT MYSTERY.

Everybody, not to say every householder, is alive to the acute dangers
of escaping gas. Every other thought was suspended for the moment. The
hall door was left open, watched over by little Hugh, and everybody,
even the stranger, Mrs. Grant, rushed to open some window. The next
thing was to find out the peccant burner.

Clementina called from the kitchen that the gas there was properly
turned off, save one light still burning. It was the same in hall and
dining-room; what was not alight was duly turned off. Miss Latimer,
coming downstairs at the moment, reported that there was no odour of
escaping gas in the higher regions.

“Well, there’s only my bedroom left,” said Tom, “and I’m certain I
turned off mine.”

But as he opened his chamber door his face lengthened. There was no
doubt now as to the source of the danger. No light was there, but the
cock of the gas-bracket stood “full on.”

The mischief was swiftly remedied, though the room was so saturated
with effluvia that it would take a prolonged airing to free it from the
fumes. But Tom was terribly perturbed by the discovery.

“I could have made affidavit that I turned off the gas,” he declared.
“I had it burning to dress by its light, and if I didn’t turn it off,
how came the light to be out?”

“You must have forgotten it wasn’t a candle, and you must have blown it
out, Tom,” said Miss Latimer.

“Well, then, I’m getting about as bad as my old landlady’s servant
girls,” decided Tom. “I can’t believe it of myself. Henceforth, I’ll
never feel sure of having done anything!”

“Perhaps you did turn it out, and then gave it an accidental knock
which turned the cock back again,” suggested Miss Latimer; “such things
will happen sometimes.”

Tom shook his head.

“The cock is very stiff,” he said.

“You must remember you were in haste. We are all rather put about just
now,” Miss Latimer went on. “But you must not dwell on it. All is well
that ends well.”

Still Tom remained dissatisfied and unconvinced, and took no part in
the eager discussion which had already begun between the two anxious
wives seated at the breakfast table.

“I think I know how I’ll manage,” said the Captain’s wife. “I’ll go
to the shipping offices myself. No”—she interrupted herself as Lucy
made a hasty movement—“you mustn’t think of coming with me. With your
face, my dear, you’d never get anything out of them while there was the
faintest chance of their being able to hold it back. But perhaps,” she
added turning to Tom, “this young gentleman will come with me to show
me the way, and to take care of me over those busy City crossings, for
I recollect that when I once went with the Captain to the office, there
was some clever steering to be done ere we got there!”

Up to this point nobody had remembered that Mrs. Grant did not know
Tom. Now Lucy recollected herself and introduced the boy as an employee
in Charlie’s office, and at present a member of the Challoner household.

Mrs. Grant beamed on him.

“This is most fortunate,” said she. “For I’m sure your masters will
give you an off day to help me find out whether there’s any news of
their Mr. Challoner—and of my Captain!”

“I’m sure they will!” cried Tom. “The chiefs are always asking whether
we have heard anything. Still I’ll have to go to the office first to
tell them why I’m wanting leave of absence.” He suited the action to
the word, bustling away, saying, “Wait till I come back—and I’ll be
back as fast as I can fly!”

When he was gone, Mrs. Grant and Lucy had time for a little quiet talk.
It was very easy for Mrs. Grant to say that on the platform she had
recognised Lucy from her old photograph, but she did not add that she
was shocked at the change visible in her, the manifold signs of nerve
strain and exhaustion.

“If she has much more waiting, she’ll set sail herself for a far-off
shore,” thought the good woman. Yet when she found that Lucy had
regular duties at the Institute, she would not allow Lucy to dream of
absenting herself for her sake.

“No, no,” she said. “I did not come here to upset your regular ways.
For one thing, if you begin to change those, people will realise how
anxious you are, and then they’ll pull long faces to you, and that will
make everything still harder and worse to bear. It’s wise to keep a
still sough, as we say in the North. You just go about your usual day’s
work, and when you come home, you’ll find me and the young gentleman
returned and waiting, and whatever we have heard, you shall hear it
all—honour bright, I promise you.”

Lucy had her full share of the sweet womanly instinct of obedience.
It is an instinct which is often strong in proportion to the strength
of the whole nature. It works so naturally and grows so strong in the
fortunate daughter and the happy wife, that it adds terribly to the
sense of disaster when the props to which it twines are withdrawn and
it is left trailing on the ground. Lucy was quite ready to succumb
to the genial domination of this wholesome kindly woman, already her
sister in suspense and who might so soon be also her sister in sorrow.
She went upstairs before she went away, and came down saying that poor
Tom’s mischance with his gas-burner had made her so nervous that she
had carefully tested all the upstairs burners.

“Somebody else might have made a similar mistake,” said she, “but they
are all right.” So she went off, taking Hugh to the Kindergarten on her
way.

“Let her keep regularly to her teaching,” Mrs. Grant confided to Miss
Latimer. “Keep her up to that, I beg you. While we wait, and when
waiting ends—as it may—there’s nothing helps us as work does. It’s
the blessed will of God that what most of us have to do for our bread
is exactly what is good for our souls. The wash-tub and the scrubbing
brush have done lots for many a poor body who is left behind. I’ve
often seen that. It’s not for any widow’s having to work that I’m ever
sorry, but because her work is often so ill-paid, that do what she may,
she can’t keep her head above water. But, I say,” she added, sniffing,
“don’t you smell the gas very strong again?”

“Oh, it is only the remains of the accident in the boy’s bedroom,”
answered Miss Latimer. “The breeze through the back windows is driving
it more to the front of the house.”

Just at that moment Tom’s key was heard turning in the front door, and
directly he entered the house he cried—

“Why, the smell of gas is worse than ever!”

“So I think,” observed Mrs. Grant.

Tom rushed to his own bedroom.

“There’s something at the bottom of all this,” he said. “I’m as
positive that I turned it off the first time as we all are that it was
turned off afterwards.” He stamped about the chamber, exclaiming, “It’s
all right here now, the gas is turned off, and there’s no smell inside
here. The mischief is somewhere else.”

“Mrs. Challoner examined all the burners upstairs, and saw that they
were right before she went out,” said Miss Latimer. “Perhaps you notice
the smell more because you’ve just come in from the fresh air, Tom.”

“But I’ve been in the house all the time,” persisted Mrs. Grant.

Tom sprang upstairs.

“There!” he shouted. “Here’s the staircase burner turned full on, and
it’s the same here—and here—and here,” he cried, rushing from chamber
to chamber, turning off burners and throwing open windows. “Yes,”
he reiterated, as he came downstairs again, “every burner upstairs
was started—the only ones turned off are that in my room where the
mischief began and in the dining-room where you were sitting.”

“They are all right downstairs,” remarked Clementina from the back of
the hall. But Tom went down and made a re-examination before he would
be satisfied on that point.

Mrs. Grant and Miss Latimer looked at each other bewildered.

“I’ve not been upstairs to do up the rooms yet,” observed Clementina.
“The only room I’ve tidied yet is Mr. Tom’s. I heard the mistress say
to you, ma’am, as she went out, that she’d just been over all the
burners, and that they were right.”

“Poor dear lady,” said Mrs. Grant; “she has been so flurried and put
about that when she tried the handles, she must have turned the gas on
and never noticed that she did it!”

“That must have been so, I suppose,” Miss Latimer reluctantly admitted;
“but it’s hard to believe. Lucy is so wonderfully careful. However much
she suffers herself, none of her duties suffer!”

“Ah, but that’s different,” Mrs. Grant replied. “She thought she was
thoroughly doing her duty now; only her mind slipped off, and she did
it the other way about.”

“I don’t believe it,” said Clementina energetically.

“What don’t you believe?” asked Tom.

“I don’t believe my mistress made any mistake. I never knew anybody so
careful as she is.”

“But what other explanation can we offer?” inquired Miss Latimer.

Clementina answered solemnly, “I believe there is an evil spirit in
this house just now.” Then, as if to give emphasis to her words, she
turned and marched from the room.

“She is very superstitious,” Miss Latimer observed to Mrs. Grant. “If
she gets this sort of thing into her head, as I’ve felt she was doing
for some time, she’ll go off, and her departure just now will be a
great trial. Are many people in the north superstitious?” she asked.

Mrs. Grant laughed. “Human nature is much the same everywhere,” she
answered. “That’s what the Captain always said. He’s known folks black,
and brown, and yellow, and every shade that they call white, but he
says there are only two differences among them, and that’s goodness
and badness, and that you find both everywhere. All the qualities,
he says, are sprinkled over the world, pretty fairly divided. As for
superstitions, what does the word mean? I believe in evil spirits, of
course, but they work through ourselves.”

“Well, I’m very glad I am not going to my pupils this morning,”
observed Miss Latimer, “and as I shall spend most of my time
supervising the gas-burners, I think you may rely that you will not
find the house blown up when you return from your quest.”

Mrs. Grant and Tom started off for the shipping office. As they went,
she confided to him her plan of operations.

“I shall send you in first,” she said. “Men often won’t tell a woman
the worst, though they know she’s got to hear it. They put off the
hard job on somebody else. It’s a cruel sort of kindness. Very likely
they’ll tell you plainly what they would gloss over to Mrs. Challoner
or me.”

“But they’ll ask who sent me?” suggested Tom.

“Don’t wait till they ask the question,” she answered. “What’s the name
of the firm you work for?”

“Patrick, Elsum, and Challoner,” he replied. “That’s the proper name;
but as Mr. Challoner only newly got into the firm, his name is often
not added. I don’t think it is in the Directory.”

“Then say straight out that you are a clerk at Patrick and Elsum’s,
and that you want to know everything they have heard of the _Slains
Castle_. Don’t seem any more anxious than you would be if it was a
matter of some client’s cargo. As soon as you come out and tell me all
they say, I’ll go in myself with you and have it all cleared up.”

She had to wait rather longer than she had thought, and when Tom came
out and advanced towards her, she saw that his face was very grave
indeed.

“Well?” she said, quite sharply.

“There is something known,” Tom answered in a low and solemn voice.
“They say that a spar and a piece of sail, with _Slains Castle_ painted
on them, have been picked up by a Pacific liner.”

Mrs. Grant stood still, and caught her breath.

“I’m going straight into the office,” she said, “to ask why they could
not write that to me, instead of bringing me up here to have to get it
out of them by guile! And it’s not such a wonderful thing that they
need keep it to themselves. One knew something must have happened,
and this only shows how something has gone wrong, and how they’ve had
to take to the boats and get into any port they could. That’s how I’m
going to look at it, and so must Mrs. Challoner.”

Her interview in the office was not very long. As she walked back with
Tom, Mrs. Grant’s thoughts seemed of Lucy rather than of herself.

“You see all this trouble has come into her life by an accident, as
it were,” she said; “it’s like happening to get shot the first time
you handle a gun. But this is the ill wind that I’ve always watched to
bring my trials. I laid that to my soul when I married the Captain.”

“I’m so glad that you’ll be with my poor friend,” remarked Tom, himself
immensely relieved by this vigorous presence.

“But, my dear boy, I must go straight home by the night train. If any
mischance has befallen the Captain, there’s but the more reason for the
mate to be at her post. Mrs. Challoner has got Miss Latimer and you to
look after her; she couldn’t have kinder people.”

All the little household had gathered in before Lucy came. They had the
fire blazing, and the tea set for her return. They could not lighten
the falling blow, but they could surround her with loving kindliness.

Lucy heard the news very quietly indeed. She lifted Hugh upon her
knee and kissed him two or three times. Then she said she was afraid
they would all take cold through wandering about in such disagreeable
weather. She put Hugh down, rose, and went out of the room, leading him
by the hand.

Mrs. Grant shook her head. “If our husbands are really gone,” she said,
“she won’t stay long after them.”

“Oh, yes, she will,” asserted Miss Latimer; “the source of all strength
is open to my Lucy, and she will be found ready to do the next thing.”

“I know there’s a great deal in that,” Mrs. Grant admitted. “Grief does
not kill according to the greatness of itself, or of the love behind
it, only according to the weakness of the constitution; but she looks
little more than a spirit already.”

A postman’s knock came to the door. Tom ran to see what had arrived. He
did not come straightway back to the parlour, and when he did, he threw
Miss Latimer a significant glance.

“I think I’d better run round to the office,” he said, “and let them
know what we have heard. And I think I’ll look in also on Mr. Somerset.
I’ll be back in good time to see Mrs. Grant to the station, as she is
quite determined to go to-night.”

By the time Tom reached the office, his principals had departed. Tom
did not choose to tell his melancholy news to any of the underlings;
but he was only too anxious to disburden himself to Mr. Somerset.

That gentleman was deeply moved by the tidings of the _Slains
Castle_—so ominous of the true significance of the long silence. Yet he
allowed himself to see that there might be some force in Mrs. Grant’s
arguments, when Tom repeated them to him.

But Tom had more news. He had to show Mr. Somerset what had arrived by
post only the minute before he started to visit him—what indeed had
been the controlling cause of that visit.

It was a letter with a black edge so deep that it scarcely left room
for the ill-written, ill-spelled direction—

    To the Peple
      at No. — Pellum Street.

“It is the same handwriting as was on the envelope of the blank sheet
that Mrs. Challoner got before Christmas,” said Tom. “Don’t you
remember that envelope was torn up at first, but that I got the pieces
out of the waste-paper basket and kept them? Directly I saw this I
compared the two; it’s the same handwriting, only this is worse.”

Mr. Somerset turned it over and over in his hand. “Did you tell Mrs.
Challoner about this?” he asked.

“No,” answered Tom emphatically; “I did not. It would have been too
cruel to show it to her to-day—I couldn’t. Besides, it is not addressed
to her.”

“You have done rightly,” said Mr. Somerset; “even if it be nothing but
the circular of a mourning warehouse, it is not a thing for her to see
to-day. Its coming to-day is a very strange coincidence!”

“Is it a mere coincidence?” questioned Tom.

“Well, as you say, it is not addressed to Mrs. Challoner. You are
one of ‘the peple’ as much as she is. You have a perfect right to
open it, and when we see its contents we can the better judge of its
significance.”

The contents were a sheet of thick paper with heavy black borders,
between which, on all four sides, was a long “screed,” which seemed
to the most careful scrutiny to be nothing but pot-hooks and hangers,
dotted i’s, and crossed t’s, making not one intelligible word among
them all!

“It is evident to me,” said Mr. Somerset, “that the blank letter and
the ‘knocks’ and this letter all emanate from somebody who wishes
to annoy and to give pain. I can’t see why they should do so. It is
probably the work of some of the servants who have given Mrs. Challoner
so much trouble, or of some of their friends. At any rate, the matter
is not one in which we can readily move; and to-day we will not call
Mrs. Challoner’s attention to it. She has but too much trouble already!”

“Yes, indeed!” sighed Tom. “We’ve all been terribly upset since
yesterday. We scarcely know what we are doing. I left my gas turned on
this morning, and not alight, and Mrs. Challoner got so nervous that
she tried if all the other burners were right, and turned them on by
mistake!”

Mr. Somerset did not pay much heed to these domestic catastrophes. He
was preparing to accompany Tom back to Pelham Street. He wanted to see
Mrs. Grant himself. He did not forget that the Challoners’ woe involved
hers, and like their true friend, as he was, he wished to show all the
attention and hospitality which he knew they would have desired to
tender to a woman under such anxiety.

He found Lucy, as Mrs. Grant whispered, “holding on bravely.” She was
even preparing to accompany her guest to the railway station, to see
her off on her homeward journey. But she was not reluctant to yield
to Mr. Somerset’s request that she would delegate this duty to him—a
proposal which Mrs. Grant backed with much urgency.

“Keep her to her work, all you good friends of hers,” whispered that
worthy woman. “Never mind her getting tired. For the rest, let her
be quiet when she wishes it. Spare her from all the little squalid
worries you can; I don’t mean keep them from her, but stand between
her and them; let her get them, as it were, passed through you first.
Ah, I know!” added Mrs. Grant; “for as I’m a sailor’s wife, so am I a
sailor’s daughter, and what we’re bearing to-day, I’ve seen my mother
live through thrice—once for her husband, and twice for her sons.”

As their cab drew up at the station, it had to wait a second while a
carriage drove off.

“Dr. Ivery’s carriage,” whispered sharp Tom to Mr. Somerset. “So I
suppose he is in the station.”

True enough, as they passed through the booking-office, there was
Dr. Ivery taking his ticket. Mr. Somerset knew him, having met him
several times during Mr. Challoner’s illness. They greeted each other,
Mrs. Grant and Tom passing on. Mrs. Grant’s train was already in the
station, but would not start for another quarter of an hour.

Tom turned to look at his friend and the physician. He saw that they
were in close conversation, and Mr. Somerset had actually produced
the black-edged letter! The doctor was carefully examining it under
a lamp. He handed it back with a few emphatic words, which Mr.
Somerset received with a gesture of surprise and interrogation. Then
they both looked at it together, the doctor pointing to details in
the superscription, Mr. Somerset eagerly following his words, and
alternately watching his finger and looking into his face. Finally, he
re-took the letter, and both gentlemen shook their heads, the doctor
extending both his hands as though to say that his words opened wide
issues. Then, as Mrs. Grant’s train was just starting, they hastily
shook hands, and Mr. Somerset hastened back to give the good lady his
parting words as she went off.

“Tom,” said Mr. Somerset, grasping the lad’s arm as they re-entered
the cab, which Mr. Somerset had retained to drive them back to Pelham
Street, “Dr. Ivery is truly concerned about the news I gave him. He has
much admiration for Mrs. Challoner’s pluck and determination. Then I
thought I would tell him about the little worry of these letters; and,
Tom, he has a most startling theory on the subject—indeed, it is no
theory, he regards it as a scientific fact.”

“What is it?” Tom asked eagerly.

“He says these letters are written by some demented person; that
such things are a well known phase of mental failure; that the very
caligraphy is characteristic, the way the letters and lines run into
each other, the bad spelling—everything!”

“I don’t see that the doctor’s opinion helps us much,” remarked Tom,
almost irritably. “Who is the lunatic? and why is the lunatic concerned
with our household?”

“Those questions remain unanswered,” said Mr. Somerset. “There is no
need to ask ‘why’ where lunacy is concerned. It is precisely without
reason that it acts, and there is little organic unity in its actions.”

They found Miss Latimer sitting alone in the parlour. Lucy had retired.

“Sorrow is sometimes sleepy,” said Miss Latimer, “and it is God’s
medicine when it is.” But Lucy had left behind kind “good nights” for
Mr. Somerset and Tom, and exhortations that the former was not to think
of going home without having his supper.

It was a dreary little meal. While Clementina set or removed the
dishes, they did not check their conversation about the general
position.

“If these strange freaks be really the work of a lunatic,” said Mr.
Somerset, “of course the poor creature cannot be blamed; but none the
less we must try that he or she be in some way restrained, as soon as
discovered, for nobody knows what they may do next.”

“Those that get called mad are sometimes not so mad as folks think,
sir,” Clementina put in, in her civil, sad way.

“It’s strange to discover that we seem to know as little of what is
going on beside us, as we do of what is happening to Mr. Challoner at
the other side of the world,” remarked Tom.

“Oh, we are badly in want of a sixth sense, such as some of your old
Highland seers claimed, Clementina,” said Miss Latimer.

“Aye, but they did not claim it, they had it,” said Clementina
confidently; “yet it wrought them little good. They could not use it
when they wished, they had to wait for it, and it came only when it
listed; often it would not come, and it would never bide.”

“Yet some people claim that these mysterious faculties are being slowly
brought into light and order,” observed Mr. Somerset, turning to Miss
Latimer. “I do not know anything of the subject myself, and I find it
hard to believe. There are people who profess so much of this modern
magic that if you gave them Charlie’s last letter, they would pretend
to tell you where he is, and what he is doing.”

“The Brahan Seer did that, nigh two hundred years ago,” said Clementina
eagerly. “He told the proud Lady Seaforth what was keeping her husband
in France, and he got himself burned for his pains.”

“I should think it was bordering on sin to make any such inquiry,”
said Miss Latimer. “If there are any mysterious faculties only half
developed in human nature, we should not hasten to mix them up with the
solemn and sacred things of our lives. We know enough to be sure that
many spiritual dangers lie that way. To venture our peace of mind among
such risks, is like going into a laboratory and tasting everything, not
knowing which is poisonous.”

“Yet, to use your simile, there must be laboratories, and tests, and
fit occasions for working among such things,” said Mr. Somerset. “Still
I agree with you absolutely in the necessity of keeping the treasures
of our hearts and lives out of so tainted and be-fogged an atmosphere.”

“Well, I’m sure these silly letters are not sacred treasures,” said
Tom. “Suppose we give one of them to a detective to-morrow, and take
him with us to put it into the hand of a psychometric or clairvoyant,
or whatever they call the modern wizard or witch, and allow them to
clairvoyantly perceive—isn’t that the cant?—the person who sent it. It
would be a good test if this did give us a clue, and if it didn’t, or
if it misled us, why there would be no harm done—it wouldn’t matter a
bit—we should be just where we are.”

Clementina had removed the supper-tray while he was speaking. Mr.
Somerset rose up to go. He did not reply to Tom’s suggestion, not
taking it seriously, but said “good night,” promising to come back very
soon, possibly next day.

In the morning Tom woke rather lazily, but he jumped up in a great
fright, seeing that his watch already pointed to half-past eight! “I
must have slept very heavily,” he thought, “to have heard no knock nor
bell, nor anything!”

And he dressed in great haste.

(_To be continued._)




GIRLS AS I HAVE KNOWN THEM.

BY ELSA D’ESTERRE-KEELING, Author of “Old Maids and Young.”


PART VII.

THE OLD-FASHIONED GIRL.

    “Modest as morn, as midday bright,
    Gentle as evening.”

(A girl described by the poet Andrew Marvell.)

[Illustration: _A MARVELL_OUS GIRL]

By the old-fashioned girl is not here meant the girl of a type extinct,
but the girl of a type still existing, if in less numbers than of old.
I have a sheaf of letters by this girl beside me. None of these letters
bears date earlier than 1893. One of them, written on Christmas morning
of that year, begins—

“To-day is just like a beautiful Spring morning, the crocuses and buds
showing above ground, and all the buds forward.”

A week later, the writer announces—

“The weather is so open that Eva was able to pick some rosebuds on
Christmas Day.”

Under date February 12th, 1894, there is the following—

“The kitten Sixpenny is getting plump on bullfinches which the gardener
shoots. They do a lot of damage to the fruit-buds.”

The same letter contains this communication—

“The violets and camellias are backward this year, but all the crocuses
and snowdrops are now at their best, and we daily examine daffodil
buds.”

“Jacob, a jackdaw,” is mentioned in a subsequent letter, where the
reference to him runs—

“Jacob, a jackdaw, has been lately acquired. He resides in a big
aviary, and sometimes has a rabbit put in with him to get change of
air.”

A girl who writes letters like that is a girl who would have been after
the heart of Gilbert White of Selborne.

The old-fashioned girl is sentimental in so far as to be sentimental
is to have a tender and susceptible heart, for her sentimentality is
not of that order the other name of which is mawkishness. In fact,
it is of a kind that justifies the singular assertion made by gentle
William Shenstone: “The French use the word _naïve_ in such a sense as
to be explainable by no English word, unless we will submit to restrain
ourselves in the application of the word _sentimental_.”

This sentimentality, the other name of which is _naïveté_ of feeling,
in the old-fashioned girl led her to say the other day to a woman whom
she loved, “I wonderfully admire you,” and _naïveté_ of feeling it
is that inspires phrasing so charming as this, which I cite from the
letter (date May 1st, 1894) of an old-fashioned girl: “It is four years
since I have seen you, my friend, except by letters.”

[Illustration: AN INFANT PHENOMENON

_There he’s the darlingest dearest cleverest, brightest little fellow
in the world. Yes he is._]

It has been said in the foregoing that the old-fashioned girl exists in
less numbers to-day than in days gone by; so far is she, however, from
being as uncommon as the great auk, that I who write this have only
to shut my eyes to see a long procession of old-fashioned girls pass
before me.

First passes Ann (in her own explanatory phrasing, “plain
_A-double-N_”), who always brings her letters to a close with “believe
me,” and uses a nominative of address in writing a postcard.

Next pass Elizabeth, Betsy, Bessy and Bess—no _Elsie_, mark you.

Elizabeth wears boots with toe-caps, and is, we who know her believe,
the last girl who will use the phrase, “canons of good taste.”

[Illustration: A VISITATION

_There Mrs. Bile I’ve brought you another little pie of my own making_]

Betsy wears in winter a crotcheted muffler and Ringwood gloves. She
always says at a visit’s end, “Now I must be going,” and generally
says that she has “paid a visitation.” This makes new-fashioned people
smile, and, as Betsy only says it when in merry pin, this pleases her.
Betsy is a wag in her old-fashioned way. Thus she always counts her
cherry-stones, and affects distress if they come to _never_. This also
makes new-fashioned people smile.

Bessy we call “the quotation girl.” To Bessy, coffee is “the fragrant
juice of Mocha’s berry brown,” and Bessy at the tea-table refers to
“the cups that cheer, but not inebriate.” Bessy will herself only be
described in a quotation—

    “Old-fashioned poetry, but choicely good.”

Bess uses what we others call “dictionary words”—such words as
_pusillanimity_ and _titillation_. Bess—does this need telling?—hails
from beyond Tweed.

Next passes Susan, who says, “Papa and mamma,” when she does not say
“Father and mother.” The new-fashioned girl says “papa and mother.”
Susan, too, prefers the word “lady” to “woman,” and “gentleman”
to “man.” In fact, she has somewhat aristocratic leanings; but
condescension is no part of her manner, for she knows that politeness
levels up.

Next pass the Marys, some of whom are Pollys.

[Illustration: MINERVA

An old-fashioned girl]

Polly, number one, combines a love of cookery with a love of bookery,
to phrase the matter as a certain poet would have phrased it, and to
these loves she adds a third, the love of needlework. If you should
tell her that a good needlewoman makes a bad student, she will tell you
in reply that Minerva beat Arachne in the art of needlework. She is so
far from being a bad student that it is only part of her knowledge to
know that.

Polly, number two, is not learned at all, but is of marvellous
dexterity with her fingers. She should have lived in the days of spears
and spindles, some people say. These people are of those who have
nothing in their heads but a tongue.

Of the Marys called Mary, there passes first that Mary to whom, albeit
her home is London, a Monday Popular Concert is not “a Pop,” and to
whom a photograph is not a _photo_.

Next passes the Mary to whom an Ellen said—

“You must have been born grown-up, like a fly, Mary.”

To whom Mary: “What do you mean?”

“Why, don’t you know, goose, that flies don’t grow, that they—let me
think of the way it’s put in the books—emerge from the larva in a
perfect state?”

To which Mary, dreamily: “Do they? That’s very interesting.”

A less old-fashioned Mary might not have found a fact conveyed as that
fact was conveyed in a primary degree “interesting.”

The old-fashioned girl is not always handled tenderly by the
new-fashioned girl. “Here’s a description of you,” so sneers one
Muriel, and reads aloud from a book, “A young lady in the possession of
all the virtues which adorn the most amiable of her sex.”

To which the Mary sneered at answers, “No, no; that flatters me.”

Lastly, there passes Emma, the old-fashioned girl who heard lately with
amazement that (so the new-fashioned girl phrased the matter) “cut
glass is vulgar.”

“How can,” said Emma, “_glass_ be vulgar?”

Emma lives in a world in which not only is cut glass still in
estimation, but in which the word “vulgar” is used in a sense in which
it is inapplicable to glass.

Emma is very fastidious in regard to phrasing. She is never caught
using the form “different _to_,” and she follows the rule which
prescribes the use of “better,” where the ungrammatical say “best.” Of
her adjectives, which are few and carefully chosen, a favourite one is
“elegant,” which she uses elegantly. Her spelling has an old-fashioned
look. Thus she writes _shew_, _sew_, _ribband_ and _bason_. She prefers
_carven_ to “carved,” and, in regard to another past participle, she is
open to the gentle satire of the _Cornhill_ essayist, who wrote in 1885
of “very young ladies” what follows—

“They write first, ‘his health was drunk,’ and then, alarmed at
the apparent inebriety of that harmless past participle, alter it
incontinently to ‘his health was drank.’”

[Illustration: REDGAUNTLET AND BLUE-STOCKING A NOVEL COMBINATION]

Emma prefers the sound of “his health was drank” to that of “his health
was drunk.” Such archaisms as _to pen_ for _to write_, and _a braid
of hair_ for _a plait of hair_, are also in favour with Emma, though
her notions in style have undergone some modification since she wrote
her first English composition, which began, “I sit down to write an
essay.” Emma is at present engaged upon writing a novel in letter form,
modelled on Sir Walter Scott’s _Redgauntlet_. That is a secret. Emma
has many secrets. New-fashioned girls are said to have none.

Never believe it!

Perhaps the old-fashioned girl is seen to least advantage in a
new-fashioned school. The modern system of examination perplexes her.
It was not quite a dunce, but merely a bewildered old-fashioned girl
who wrote what follows in obedience to the injunction, “Comment on
the grammatical peculiarity in the sentence—‘Cromwell was by far our
remarkablest governor.’”

“_Carlyle did not know better English, or perhaps he wanted to make a
joke._”

Not that the old-fashioned girl is not sometimes a frank ignoramus.
This must be allowed to be the case when she defines—I cite here from
authentic documents—_phenomenon_ as “a very bad-tempered person,” and
_emolument_ as “great flattery.”

In dialogue with the new-fashioned girl the old-fashioned girl does not
always come off best, but once and again she scores, if only by the
utterance of a bold paradox. Take the following.

“I wish,” said the new-fashioned girl, “I was dead.”

“You are always wishing something impossible, Evelyn,” answered the
old-fashioned girl. “The moment you are dead you will be wishing you
were alive.”

Paradox of a kind less mordant and less moribund is contained in
the following, which I set down as the favourite exclamation of an
old-fashioned girl born blind—

“Ah, I see it all now!”

Sometimes the sorrows of the old-fashioned girl are of a kind
calculated to rouse the amusement of those who are of a newer fashion.
This is surely the case in the matter of one Ada, who writes—

“I have contracted the miserable habit of writing short words
backwards, putting ‘dab’ for ‘bad,’ and much more dreadful things than
that. I feel that in writing my own name I write it backwards, and that
it is only by happy accident that it reads all right. This comes from
a game which we have been playing, and which consists of naming words
that make sense spelt backwards. The boys like it (this will shock
you), because of the word _mad_.”

Useless were it to tell this Ada that the word which “mad” spells
backwards is one in which “the boys” may fairly take delight, meaning
merely, as it does, “a bank to confine water.” The stricken Ada knows
boys better.

[Illustration: ANOTHER INNOCENT]

(_To be continued._)




IN THE TWILIGHT SIDE BY SIDE.

BY RUTH LAMB.


PART XI.

THE LITTLE ONES OF THE FAMILY AND THE GLORY OF MOTHERHOOD.

    “A joyful mother of children.”—Psa. cxiii. 9.

       *       *       *       *       *

I called the subject of our two last talks all-important, because I
could hardly imagine one possessing wider interest for you. But when I
introduced it, I alluded to you, my dear girl friends, not only as the
wives, but as the mothers of the future. Marriage and motherhood are
alike sacred subjects—the latter certainly not less so than the former.

Before the day arrives when the sweet but solemn responsibility of
motherhood comes to the young wife, girls who are members of large
families have mostly shared in the toil, anxiety, and, let us hope,
also in the joy and brightness that the little ones bring into the
world with them.

It makes me glad as I call to mind many beautiful pictures of sisters
who have been second only to the real mother in their loving care of,
and tender sympathy with, the younger members of the family.

Many a delicate ailing mother has been aided on the path to renewed
health by the thought that the children, about whom she would otherwise
be painfully anxious, are being lovingly watched over by an elder
sister. As she has lain, so willing yet so unable to fulfil her
maternal duties, her heart has been full of joy, and her thoughts have
gone up in praise to God for the gift of the precious daughter who is
cheerfully carrying the weight under which she, unaided, must have sunk.

There are, thank God, many girls who are little mothers almost from
their cradles. We can find them in rich homes and poor ones. In courts
and slums where the direst poverty prevails, the baby, often unwelcome
to the elders, is passed over to the ceaseless care of one who is only
a few years past babyhood herself.

From the very first the little deputy-mother deems it her baby, her
choicest treasure, and finds beauties and charms in it which are
invisible to other eyes. Its increasing size and weight may cause her
greater weariness, but they are none the less sources of pride and joy,
and make her forget her own aching back.

She would go hungry that it might be well fed; cold, that it might be
warmly bundled up in the shawl that ought to do duty as covering for
both of them. Her baby may be but a caricature of the pink and white
loveliness of another infant clad in silk and lace and with two nurses
to watch its every movement; but let a ragged dweller in the same court
disparage the looks of her darling, and she would fight the slanderer
as stubbornly as ever knight of old did in defence of the charms of his
ladye love.

I must not dwell on this picture. Long ago when the “G. O. P.”[1] was
itself a baby under two years old, I wrote with heartfelt respect of
“Little Nurses.” I had studied them in many places, and the sight of
their devotion had inspired my admiration and loving sympathy.

[1] No. 69, vol. ii.

Turning from the baby devotee of the slums, and not for a moment
forgetting sweet pictures of sisterly devotion which I have seen in
other ranks of life, I am going to indulge in a little croak about the
decay of the maternal spirit in many of the girls of to-day.

I was journeying northward some three years ago, and during part of the
time I had only one companion. She was past girlhood, probably some
years over thirty, and in the course of conversation she spoke of her
old happy home and the gradual scattering of its inmates, until she
found herself the last one left. Her parents had died not long after
each other, and brothers’ and sisters’ homes were far apart. That there
had been true family union and affection amongst them I felt sure, for
my companion could not speak of the good father and mother without a
trembling of the voice and tears which she turned away to hide.

Later the talk turned on children. I suppose, as an old mother, I must
have expressed my deep love for them, and I was almost horrified when
my companion exclaimed—

“I loathe children. I cannot bear even to touch a child.”

The expression on her face proved her sincerity.

Need I tell you, dear girls, that a barrier seemed to rise up between
my companion and myself, as I heard these unwomanly, nay, I may say,
inhuman words? Only a short time before, the girl had been moved to
tears as she spoke of the loving devotion of which she had been an
object, both as a child and from her youth up. Yet her memories of her
own home life and of the parents she mourned, had not awakened in her
cold heart one spark of tenderness for the helpless little creatures
who are so dependent on those around them.

A truly feminine nature, with its motherly instincts fostered as they
ought to be, instead of being crushed down and stifled, regards every
child with tenderness, and would make the surroundings of all the
little ones brighter, purer, and holier if it were possible to do so.

It happened on that same journey that a comely Scotchwoman got into
our carriage at a country station. At the door she held out one of the
loveliest year-old babies I ever saw, and addressing my companion,
said, “Here, tak the bairn, please, whiles I lift in the others,” for
there were two more youngsters on the platform just a step above each
other in size.

My companion fairly shrank into her corner and kept her hands firmly
clasped, whilst her face expressed disgust and vexation at the
unceremonious request. The mother’s astonishment was almost ludicrous,
but I promptly said, “Give me the bairn. I’m used to bairns, you see,
and this lady is not.” It was a delight to hold the bonny smiling
darling in my arms. Her beautiful clothing and the pretty neat garments
of the elder children were eloquent of loving care. And the mother was
eloquent too about the object of the half-hour’s journey which was to
show the children to “my ain guid mither, who is just wearyin’ for a
look at them,” I was told.

I heard about five older ones at home, and how they had to go, two at a
time and the baby, to see the grandmother, with many particulars which
brought this comparatively young mother into fullest sympathy with me,
the old one.

I was quite sorry to give up my pretty charge when parting time came.
Sorry, too, that my other travelling companion, who sat silent in her
corner with averted eyes, could not appreciate the charms of childhood,
or care to impress on her memory the beautiful picture of motherly
self-devotion and industry furnished by that sample batch from the
flock of eight. How each bright healthy face, each spotless tasteful
garment would appeal to the grandmother! How glad and proud she would
be to see the fruits of her own training, as she looked at her matronly
daughter and those “bonny bairns” of another generation!

Yet how kind was my first companion to me, when the others had left
us alone again! We parted at the next stopping-place, but during the
waiting interval she was like a good daughter in her care of me. I
think that in paying me sweet attentions she thought of the mother of
her girlhood whom she had lost. The pity of it was that memory did not
take her further back, so that, in thinking of the needs of infancy and
her own childhood, she might have been stirred to sympathy with other
helpless little ones of the human family.

Another girl, whom I know to be really warm-hearted and affectionate,
said of her sister’s baby, “She’s a horrid little creature, more like a
skinned rabbit than anything else. I cannot bear to look at her, and I
would not touch her for the world.”

We know that newly-born babies are not always beautiful to look upon,
but how soon the redness of their faces tones down to lovely pink and
white, and the puckered skin fills out and becomes soft as satin to the
touch. That girl’s heart must be unwomanly indeed for which a baby’s
smile and outstretched arms have not an irresistible charm.

Putting aside the fascination of external beauty, we should bear in
mind the great fact that the frailest, least attractive infant that
comes into the world is the home of an immortal soul. It brings with it
a burden of sweet but solemn responsibility to be borne, first of all
by the parents, but shared in a less degree by all whose companionship
must influence it for good or evil.

I am not going to imagine that amongst you, my dear girl friends and
twilight companions, any can be found who have no warm comers in their
hearts for helpless little ones, or who are insensible to the glory and
responsibility of motherhood. So, having given vent to the little croak
suggested by the sayings of sundry girls whom I have met elsewhere,
let us talk about the children over whom we have, or may have in the
future, the strongest influence of all. Strongest and best also; if
we are only true to our divinely-given instincts, and alive to the
vastness of the responsibilities of motherhood. I cannot help thinking
that the study of child life and character should form part of every
girl’s education. Surely no branch of natural history can be equally
interesting.

There can hardly be a more fascinating subject than natural history in
all its branches, and we can admire and sympathise with the earnest
student who spends the best part of a lifetime in observing the ways
of an insignificant insect. Every secret of structure or habit thus
revealed is another proof of the goodness and power of God, and adds
to His glory in the eyes of His believing children, who exclaim in the
words of the Psalmist, “O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom
hast Thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches.” The Revised
Version gives the word “creatures,” instead of riches, and truly when
you and I, my dear ones, call to mind the little we know about these
wondrous minute organisms that scientific research has revealed of
late, we are struck with the fitness of the change. It is hard to grasp
the idea alike of the vastness and the minuteness of God’s works.

If I had time I could quote many passages of His Word which prove that
some of the best men of old were close observers of nature, and to be
such is quite in accordance with its teachings. I would plead with all
nature students, but, above all, with girls, who will be the mothers
of the future, to give the closest, most prayerful study to the young
human beings on whose right training so much depends.

Lovers of horses, dogs or cats are generally eloquent about their
pets, and can indicate every point of excellence in them, or allude
regretfully to the smallest blemish. They spend money lavishly in order
to acquire perfect specimens, and are careful to maintain them in
health and more than comfort.

These costly pets are so much living capital, and it is safe to say
that many a parent could tell more about the disposition and doings of
a favourite horse or dog, than of the dispositions of the children who
call them father or mother.

It is often said that the baby brings a vast heritage of love with
it into the world, and I believe in the truth of this. But sometimes
the love gets into the wrong heart, if I may use such an expression,
instead of filling that of the mother, who, regarding the helpless
creature as a hindrance to what she calls “pleasure,” is willing to
relinquish the privilege of caring for her child to other hands. If
these are truly womanly hands, and the nurse has in her a motherly
heart, the child may lose little by the change during its first years.
Later on, Nature asserts herself and only a mother’s love can satisfy a
child’s yearnings.

On this subject of motherhood, as in all that you and I, my dear girl
friends, have talked about together, we need to look into the Book of
books for light and guidance.

Motherhood is part of Nature’s—or should I not rather say of God’s—plan
for womanhood. Let us look back together at the earliest chapter of
human history, and note how children were regarded then.

Eve, so named because she was “the mother of all living,” or “life,”
as the Revised Version gives it, clasped her first-born to her breast
and cried in her exultant joy, “I have gotten a man from the Lord.”
She looked upon her babe as the direct gift of God. She, like many a
mother in after days, could not foresee the sin and the sorrow that
would shadow his manhood and her own heart. But in holding her infant
treasure to her breast, she would have a present joy and sense of
riches that words cannot describe. She, the only human mother, with the
only human infant in the wondrous new world which was to be peopled by
her children, must have had sensations which none of her descendants
could possibly repeat.

And yet, believe me, every loving mother who is worthy of the name, has
a like feeling of riches, when she can say, “This is my child, my very
own. This wonderful little body is given me to feed, clothe and guard.
It is my privilege to see that it is fed with food convenient for it,
that the tender frame is shielded from too great heat or biting cold,
that it is kept from places and things which might injure its health,
or prevent its growth into sturdy boyhood or girlhood.” The true mother
was proud of her name in the old days of Bible history, and to be
childless was to be a sad and dissatisfied woman.

When Seth was born, after Abel had been slain by his brother, the
joyful thought of Eve was that the vacant place in her motherly heart
was filled again, and she cried, “God hath appointed me another seed
instead of Abel whom Cain slew.”

She had sons and daughters, we know not how many, during the ages which
followed, but there is no detailed history of them. Still it gladdens
our hearts to know of the joy of that first mother, when Seth was given
to her in place of the good son who “was not.”

Pass with me down the ages and look into the tent of Sarah, when she
held in her arms the child of promise, so long hoped for, even against
hope as it seemed. “And Sarah said, ‘God hath made me to laugh;
everyone that heareth will laugh with me.’”

Childless Rachel bemoaned her hard fate and cried, “Give me children,
or else I die.” Then when Joseph was born she gave him the name which
meant “added,” and said, “The Lord add to me another son.”

Yet another picture for us to look at together, my dear ones. It is
that of Jacob as he met his brother Esau. After the brothers had
embraced and kissed each other, Esau “lifted up his eyes and saw the
women and the children, and said, ‘Who are these with thee?’ And he
said, ‘The children which God hath graciously given thy servant.’”

Why are we studying all these Bible pictures, and glancing at the
domestic stories which they illustrate? Is it not that we may all
realise more fully the glory of motherhood, the value set upon children
by the mothers of old, and the universal acknowledgment that a child
was a precious gift from God?

Ah, there was no talk of loathing children then! No shrinking from
the touch of a fair, innocent, helpless babe! No talking lightly or
contemptuously of the little ones. The Psalmist calls children “the
heritage of the Lord—His reward,” and says that “He makes the barren
women to keep house” (or to dwell in a house) “and to be a joyful
mother of children.”

Motherhood conferred dignity and made the woman mistress of a home and
the head of a household. Ever and always the presence of a child or
children added to the sense of riches, being regarded as the special
gift of God and a token of His favour.

It is not easy to exhaust Scripture on this beautiful subject, for one
Bible mother seems to rise after another and claim our attention and
admiration. We see Hannah appearing in the house of the Lord, first
pleading that she too may know the glory and joy of motherhood, and
then, taking her weaned child to dedicate him to the lifelong service
of the Giver. “For this child I prayed, and the Lord hath given me my
petition which I asked of Him, therefore also I have lent him to the
Lord; as long as he liveth he shall be lent to the Lord.”

How self-sacrificing, how sublime was this act on the part of the
mother! Just when her little Samuel had twined himself round her heart
by the imperishable cords of love; as each day witnessed some new
growth and charm in the boy; and the parting must have become almost
too great a trial for the tender mother to contemplate, for “the child
was young.” Hannah brought him to Shiloh and left him there.

Hers was no temporary sacrifice. She renewed it year by year, rejoicing
that her son, God’s gift, was accepted by Him in turn as she gave him
back, “and was in favour both with the Lord and with men.”

We have passed by the mother of Moses and her plan to save, if
possible, the life of her infant, and other Bible mothers, around whom
we might well pause. We must, however, glance for a moment at the
Virgin Mother and her Babe lying in His lowly manger-bed, the infant
Saviour, “Christ the Lord.”

Stretching across the years, we see Jesus in His manhood taking the
little ones in His kind arms, blessing them and saying, “Suffer the
little children to come unto Me, and forbid them not, for of such is
the kingdom of Heaven.”

Now, my dear girl friends, what impression has this talk left on your
minds? Has it not elevated your ideas of motherhood, and taught you how
it was regarded amongst the men and women of the Bible? Is it not a
sacred and glorious trust as well as a joyful one?

Are not the little ones, of whom some girls of to-day speak slightingly
and worse, to be regarded as God’s good and precious gifts to be nursed
for the Lord, fitted for and dedicated to His service?

(_To be concluded._)




FROCKS FOR TO-MORROW.

BY “THE LADY DRESSMAKER.”


Just now there is a very general feeling that women need more oxygen
than they get. I do not know if it be owing to the largely-published
fact that the Queen spends most of her day in the open air; but certain
it is that one of the newest fashions is that of walking, and this has
taken, with the leaders of London fashions, the place of cycling, to
which they were so devoted two seasons ago. Most of the great ladies
might have been seen in the Park during the past spring taking an early
walk, frequently accomplishing the round of the Park at a good even
pace, which meant exercise and health. Of course, now we know that the
best way to avoid fat and keep the slender figure of youth is to walk
regularly and constantly, and that any dietary or starving process is
unsafe, it is easy to decide the matter for ourselves. Three miles a
day is said to be enough, though some people say more. At any rate,
it is the regularity which contains the charm and makes its success.
And the doctors say that oxygen is what is needed to keep the eyes
bright and the skin fair and healthy. So, fortunately, walking is cheap
besides being fashionable, and it is the only way to find that physical
energy without which one is inert and languid. So, now that I have told
my readers the latest development in this way, they should try to lay
in such a stock of energy during the coming autumn and winter as shall
make them perfect giants in ordinary life.

[Illustration: BRAIDED FAWN CLOTH GOWN FOR AUTUMN.]

There is another subject which is rather akin to this one, of which I
find a note, and that is the general complaints of eye-trouble made
this spring and summer by cyclists. It is said to be a form of spring
ophthalmia, caused by the particles of dust and decaying matter with
which the atmosphere is loaded, which also affect the throats of those
who are in the habit of riding with the mouth open. One of the great
London dailies has mentioned this subject, and a London specialist of
renown has declared that the remedy for the first trouble is to have a
pair of spectacles with crape sides—as the wire sides are too hot—and
to keep the mouth shut while cycling. A mild antiseptic is used for the
eye-trouble, for which a doctor should be consulted.

[Illustration: CASHMERE AUTUMN GOWN.]

And now, having informed you of the very latest modes in this
direction, we may turn to another note of mine, made at the Women’s
Congress in July last, when I quickly noticed one thing, that American
women, who are strong on matters of hygiene and ready to take advice on
it, had all dismissed veils both with hats and bonnets, and that all
the Englishwomen present, with hardly an exception, wore them—of every
kind and colour. In fact, an Englishwoman feels her face unclothed
without a veil to hide it, and the idea of its becomingness and that it
hides the ravages of time is a constantly alleged reason. The American
woman, like Gallio, cares for none of these things, and she looks as
well. Certainly her skin is as clear and healthy as anyone else’s,
and perhaps it is better and rosier in hue. She has attended lectures
innumerable on personal hygiene and on physical culture until she knows
a few things by heart. They are, that neither sun nor air are enemies
to woman’s beauty; and that science declares that veils of all kinds
are of no good for anything, and that they affect the eye and its sight
most injuriously. The subject of the danger of spotty veils has been
frequently ventilated, and yet our women and girls do not seem to have
taken notice of the warning. I was much struck with the docility of the
Americans in this way; they really tried to follow out every suggestion
and discovery which made for better health and improved powers and
energies in daily life.

[Illustration: AN AUTUMN HAT.]

It is difficult to say whether the revival, which has been very
evident, of this early Victorian poke will be a lasting one; but
I think it will probably extend into the winter in the form of
comfortable velvet and feather creations, in which we shall all look
more or less like our grandmothers. Some of us will find them very
becoming indeed. The new pokes differ from the old ones in showing
entirely that pretty coil of back hair which is so charming a feature
of present-day hair-dressing. The old pokes of the beginning of the
present reign were not made to do this, nor were they furnished with
the pretty tulle strings which add so much to their becomingness. To
me, this ancient head-covering is always associated with black ostrich
tips and pink roses, but I may find out as the seasons roll that new
discoveries have been made in this also, and that will be a decided
gain, for there was, if pictures may be trusted, an unpleasant sameness
about the headgear of one’s forebears.

The French sailor has been really distinctively the hat of the season.
It is a wonderful hat, for it suits everyone, and especially all those
difficult to suit on account of either having thin faces or possessed
of a few years too many. The brim, moreover, is not too wide, and
does not cast an unbecoming shadow. Many women invariably select this
shape, and fortunately it is always to be found, as its popularity is
quite assured. It is easy also to trim them for oneself, and select a
black one trimmed with black net, relieved, if you choose, with a paste
buckle; or else a white one trimmed entirely with white tulle or net.
These were the most fashionable things of this last season. Fancy gauze
is also worn, and the net and gauze ruchings that can be purchased
ready-made can be used for them.

It has been also much in vogue during the last few weeks to have hats
of this French sailor shape in colours, _i.e._, greys, fawns, browns,
even drabs, trimmed with tulles of the same colour. These have been
very pretty, and will be in good taste for the autumn season, as they
are suitable for wearing with travelling dresses, and they will be
found to survive a good deal of hard wear. It is rather the fashion to
wear a veil of the same colour with these hats, the meshes of which are
chosen large and the veiling clear, with dots very far apart. Violets
and blues seem to me very becoming, but I cannot say that I think the
same of reds and pinks. Veils of white lace—washing lace as it is
called—are very much used with sailor hats again.

[Illustration: A GOWN OF LACE AND VOILE.]

Our illustration of a braided gown of fawn-coloured cloth shows the
last new style for autumn wear. The braiding is done in a darker shade
of fawn; or, in some cases, in black, or in white; but the dark shade
of the same hue is more fashionable. The hat is a lace straw, trimmed
with ostrich feathers and shaded roses of a dark hue, and strings of
black gauze. This hat, and that shown in our illustration of the single
head, are good examples of the autumn afternoon hat; and they are
suitable both for visiting, and for garden-parties in the country. The
autumn hat is of a white chip, or Panama straw, with black feathers,
black gauze, and a paste buckle; while under the brim is a cluster of
chrysanthemums in mauve and red.

I wonder whether my readers have discovered for themselves the extreme
usefulness of voile as a material? I have illustrated a dress which
is, of course, suitable for dress occasions only, but which might be
modified, and would be just as suitable during the winter for quiet
evenings, as it would be for autumn garden parties.

The gown of cashmere is far more simple. It has revers of satin to
match the colour of the cashmere, which is rather an uncommon shade of
borage-blue—that delightful shade, so clear and yet not at all crude
in tone. The hat is of blue, with a wreath of very tiny mauve flowers
resting on a scarf of blue, of the very palest shade of the same.

If it should prove to be a fine autumn and winter, I hear it prophesied
on all sides that red will be more worn than even during last winter:
indeed, that all bright hues will be in favour.

My last few lines must be devoted to the question of “hats in church,”
which seems just now a burning question in America. I read an account
lately, in an American journal, of the movement in a part of the
Methodist body to do away with the wearing of large hats in church,
where their use is even more objectionable than elsewhere in any place
where people gather together in numbers. It is said by the advocates
of the change that it is not contrary to Scripture, for at the time
when St. Paul wrote, the women were in a state of servitude and more
or less seclusion, and they are not so now. It seems probable that the
movement will spread throughout America. You will find that at many
public meetings there, and even here during the Congress, many women
took their hats off while the meetings were going on.




HOUSEHOLD HINTS.


THE register of a bedroom fireplace should never be closed, but left
open for free ventilation from above.


FIRE-IRONS and fenders not in use in the summer should not be
neglected, but kept constantly rubbed up and not allowed to rust.


PARSLEY is injurious to fowls, and should not be given to them.




THREE GIRL-CHUMS, AND THEIR LIFE IN LONDON ROOMS.

BY FLORENCE SOPHIE DAVSON.


CHAPTER VIII.

THE WATER-PARTY.

“How did you enjoy yourself last evening, Marion?” asked Ada, on the
morning after Marion had paid her promised visit to Mrs. Holden.

“Very much indeed.”

“Was it a regular dinner-party?”

“Oh, no, only just ourselves, you know—and Mr. Scott!”

Jane looked very wise.

“Madge made a delightful suggestion,” went on Marion quickly. “How
should you like a water-party, Jenny?”

“The most delightful thing for this fine weather, but who would row?”

“Mr. Holden and Mr. Scott are both thoroughly accustomed to it.”

“Jenny and I can take turns,” said Ada; “we have always been accustomed
to it, but you never went in for it, did you?”

“No, I can only steer,” said Marion, laughing. “I told Madge that we
would bring half the lunch and half the crockery. We can get tea at a
cottage that they know of.”

“But you have not told us yet where we are going,” said Jane.

“Oh, I forgot. Madge and her party will meet us at West End Lane
Station, and we will take the 9.20 train to Richmond; catch the one
that goes on to Twickenham, row to Teddington, land on the bank and
have lunch, and have tea at the cottage I spoke of.”

“Just the very thing to brush the cobwebs out of our brains,” cried Ada
enthusiastically, “is it not, Jenny? We all want a treat, and we are
all rather fagged out. Is it to be this next Saturday?”

“Yes, if we can arrange it in time.”

“Well, there is very little to arrange, when one comes to think of it,”
said Ada meditatively, “unless Mrs. Holden thinks of inviting a big
party.”

“No, just themselves and ourselves.”

“Did she say what part of the lunch she would prefer to bring?”

“She suggested the meat and also the drinks.”

“Ah!” laughed Jane, “she thinks it wise to ensure something solid for
her husband and brother! And we are to bring the sweets, and so on?
Then do have a tomato salad; it is the most delightfully cooling thing
you can have on a hot day.”

“My good girl, how in the world can we pack it? I suppose you mean to
take the tomatoes and make it as it is wanted; but that is rather a
nuisance. My experience of water-parties is that you never land for
lunch until you are so famished that to make a salad is the last thing
anyone wishes, and any materials of that sort are thankfully despatched
in the raw!”

“But we can,” urged Jane. “How can an old person like you be supposed
to understand the latest contrivances of the age? We can slice the
tomatoes and put them in layers in a jam pot with the oil, vinegar,
chopped parsley and onion, and tie the whole down. It will stand up
quite well in a corner of the hamper, and will not upset.”

“Bravo, Jenny, we will certainly have one. _Is that your own idea?_”

“It is my own idea, and I intend to patent it,” said Jane, with
dignity, “so please see that you do not infringe my rights. Now one of
you can suggest a suitable sweet.”

“It is rather difficult,” said Marion. “Shapes pack so badly, and
pastry is apt to crumble. Jelly has an unfortunate habit of turning
into soup just when it is wanted.”

“Perhaps it will be better to stick to fresh fruit,” said Ada.

“We must have something else,” said Marion meditatively. “How would it
be if we took the materials for a Cicely pudding? It only takes a few
minutes to make.”

This suggestion met with warm approval from the two others, for the
Cicely pudding was an old favourite, the brilliant invention of a
mutual friend in the country; but for the recipe thereof the gentle
reader must be content to wait awhile.

“Very well,” said Jenny, “Marion shall make the Cicely pudding, and I
will make the tomato salad. What will Ada do?”

“Make the sandwiches,” said Ada promptly. “There must be sandwiches,
some of anchovy and hard-boiled egg, and some of cucumber.”

“Shall I order a sandwich loaf?” asked Marion.

“No, I think not. I prefer ‘Florentines,’ they are handier in every
way.”

“Florentines” are little long-shaped milk rolls, something the shape of
sponge fingers, but rather larger, and as they only require to be split
and spread, much time is saved, and so it was settled.

On Friday evening, whilst Ada was making the sandwiches, Marion made up
and looked over the weekly accounts up to that evening. She knew there
would be no time on Saturday, as they would be late back. A box of
fresh eggs had been sent from her country home on the Monday previous,
and this had served famously for the week’s breakfasts.

This is the dinner list:—

_Sunday._

    Fried Mutton Cutlets.
    Potatoes.
    Green Peas.
    Gooseberry Shape.

_Monday._

    Leek Soup.
    Veal Cutlets (cooked in the oven).
    Potatoes.
    Macaroni Cheese.

_Tuesday._

    Veal and Ham Patties.
    Poached Eggs on Endive.

_Wednesday._

    Boiled Neck of Mutton and Vegetables.
    Steamed Ground Rice Pudding and Jam.

_Thursday._

    Potato Soup.
    Fried Cauliflower in Batter.
    Bread and Fruit Pudding (cold).

_Friday._

    Cauliflower Soup.
    Grilled Mackerel.
    Stewed Gooseberries.

The food account was as follows:—

                                              £   s.  d.
  1½ lb. neck of mutton (cutlets)             0   1   0
  1 lb. veal cutlet                           0   0  10
  1½ qrts. gooseberries                       0   0   9
  1 lb. cheese                                0   0   7
  ½ lb. macaroni                              0   0   2
  Leeks                                       0   0   2
  Flavouring vegetables                       0   0   3
  Endive                                      0   0   2
  Potatoes                                    0   0   8
  1½ lb. neck of mutton (for boiling)         0   0  10½
  2 cauliflowers                              0   0   5
  2 mackerel                                  0   0  10
  8 loaves                                    0   2   4
  Milk                                        0   1   9
  ½ lb. tea                                   0   0  10
  1½ lb. Demerara                             0   0   3
  ½ lb. loaf                                  0   0   1
  Sponge cakes                                0   0   6
  Jug of thick cream                          0   1   0
  Small jar of greengage jam                  0   0   6
  2 punnets of strawberries                   0   1   4
  Tin of anchovy paste                        0   0   3½
  Florentines                                 0   3   0
  1 lb. tomatoes                              0   0   8
                                             -----------
                                             £0  19   3

“Where are the strawberries?” asked Jane as she looked over Marion’s
shoulder. “I have not seen them.”

“We are to call for them at the greengrocer’s the first thing, and
have them directly they come from market. I was afraid to have them in
overnight for fear of their getting too juicy.”

Early next morning the sunshine streamed into Marion’s room and awoke
her with the promise of a happy day. She rose and dressed quickly and
was down the first, looking delightfully cool and fresh in a white coat
and skirt. She busied herself with packing the hamper, and as she set
to work down came Jane, resplendent in blue. She got out the tomatoes,
sliced them quickly and arranged them in layers in a large jam pot,
sprinkling oil, vinegar, chopped parsley and onion in between. Then she
tied a new jam cover over, and put her _chef d’œuvre_ carefully in the
hamper.

“You two busy bees make me feel so disgracefully lazy,” cried Ada as
she ran in a few minutes later. “I quite intended to be the first
to-day. I will get you some breakfast to make amends,” so saying she
quickly laid the table in the sitting-room, and made the tea. As soon
as the hamper was packed, they sat down to a hasty meal. As they were
finishing there was a ring at the bell.

“I declare I had forgotten all about the post!” cried Jane. “A letter
without a stamp, I suppose. I hear Abigail speaking to him.”

But it was not the post, for the door opened, and Mr. Tom Scott was
shown in.

“I hope you will excuse me, Miss Thomas,” he said to Marion as he shook
hands and was introduced to the other two. “I was so afraid that you
might find the hamper with the crockery too heavy to carry, and my
sister said she thought I might venture to call and see if I could be
of any assistance.”

“We are just coming,” said Marion, smiling. “Thank you; I don’t think
we should have found the hamper too heavy.”

Ada and Jane disappeared to make the final preparations; Marion picked
up her hat from off the little side-table and pinned it on, listening
to Mr. Scott as he discussed the day’s proceedings. Soon Jane came back
bearing the hamper in triumph, of which Mr. Scott immediately took
possession, and so the party set out.

On the way they called for the strawberries as arranged. They got to
the station just in time to meet Mrs. Holden and her husband, who had
just arrived, having taken the next train after Tom Scott. They had
only a few minutes to wait for the Richmond train. Marion was just
going to get the tickets for her party, but she was prevented by her
friend Madge, who explained that the railway-tickets represented her
husband’s share of the entertainment and the boat her brother’s, so
it was no good protesting. So, as Jane afterwards described it (with
a sigh of content at the recollection), “they went to Twickenham like
dukes and duchesses in first-class carriages,” adding sagely, “Being a
working woman has one great advantage, for one certainly knows how to
appreciate the good things of existence when they fall to one’s share.”

The day was glorious; a deep blue sky scarcely flecked with clouds,
brilliant sunshine, not a breath of wind. The train was very full, and
there were many other merry parties besides their own. Everyone seemed
taking a holiday. At Richmond they had to run quickly over the bridge
for the Twickenham train, which they just managed to catch; as they
caught a glimpse of the river and saw how crowded and covered with
boats it was just there, they all felt glad that they had arranged
to start a little higher up, where they would have more space. At
Twickenham they got out and walked through the hot streets of the
quaint old town to the water’s edge, where under the trees the boat was
ready for them.

So they all got in—Mr. Holden and Tom Scott rowing, Jane and Ada
comfortably reclining in the bow, Mrs. Holden and Marion in the stern.
The boat glided gently along. Marion had never seen this part of the
river before, as she had had little leisure for pleasure parties since
she came to live in town, and she was delighted with the beauty of the
scene. Tom Scott showed her Pope’s Villa and other places of interest.
In spite of the heat, Jane seemed blessed with a superabundance of
energy, and after a time she took Mr. Holden’s oar and rowed so well
that he declared himself surpassed. Now they neared the towers of
Hampton Court, and finding a suitable little island shaded by willows,
they moored to a tree and prepared for lunch, for which they all had
excellent appetites.

“We have to make our pudding, you know,” said Marion, laughing.

“Going to do cooking out of doors?” asked Mr. Scott. “Shall I make a
field oven?”

“No, we don’t need to do any cooking, and it will all be ready in five
minutes,” she answered, and set to work.

She brought out the sponge cakes, split them in half, and put half
of them at the bottom of a large pie-dish that she had brought with
her; this she spread with a thick layer of greengage jam, then she put
another layer of sponge cake. “Now, Jenny, the strawberries,” she said;
but Jenny had already got them out and was busy picking off the stalks.
When this was done, she arranged them on the cake in a thick layer,
sprinkled them thickly with castor sugar, and lastly spread thick
cream, which she had brought in its own brown jar, over the whole. As a
last touch, a few “hundreds and thousands” were quickly sprinkled over
the top, and the dish was finished, amidst the admiring plaudits of
Madge and her party.

Jane’s tomato salad went excellently with the cold lamb which Mrs.
Holden had provided, and the whole repast went off well. Ada’s
sandwiches kept perfectly fresh, as they were wrapped in a damp cloth
before being packed, and they were much liked.

After lunch the indefatigable Jane washed up, Mrs. Holden and Ada
helping her, and repacked the hamper. They then rowed across the river
to the Palace. Marion suggested looking at the pictures, and Tom Scott
offered to conduct her, with an alacrity that was quite surprising,
considering that he had been expressing his absolute ignorance of the
subject about five minutes before.

“Will you come, too, Madge?”

No; Madge preferred to be lazy and sit out of doors, admiring the
orange trees—Mr. Holden also, and Ada. Jane thought she would like to
go, and so the three started off. The cool shade of the great rooms was
a delightful change after the glare of the gardens, and they sauntered
through, admiring the pictures and carving and the beautiful views seen
through the open windows. Jane was very much amused with an old Dutch
picture representing a street scene with no sky; the perspective was so
odd that she declared the people were walking on the wall like flies.
She ran back to the other two to tell them to come and look at it, but
they seemed so deeply engaged in conversation that she did not disturb
them.

“You can’t think how delightful it all is after the lonely life I have
been leading for three years,” she heard.

When they went out again to the others, the afternoon was growing
cooler. They all went back to the boat, for they were now to row a
little way in the direction of Twickenham and to land at a cottage,
where tea was ordered beforehand.

Jane rowed again, and by the time the cottage was reached was quite
willing to let the old woman in charge make the tea as she was getting
just a little tired. She did justice, however, as they all did, to the
good things provided—the honey, which the old woman’s bees had made,
the strawberries from the cottage garden, the home-made bread and
delicious country butter.

In the cool of the evening our merry party started to row back to
Twickenham, Marion steering under Mr. Scott’s direction, who was rowing
just in front of her. They just caught the train at Twickenham, and so
ended a very happy day.

(_To be continued._)




SHEILA’S COUSIN EFFIE.

A STORY FOR GIRLS.

BY EVELYN EVERETT-GREEN, Author of “Greyfriars,” “Half-a-dozen
Sisters,” etc.


CHAPTER XXI.

BROTHERLY COUNSEL.

“Oscar, now that we are alone, now that nobody can interrupt us, I want
to talk to you about my plan.”

Sheila’s face was flushed, her big eyes were sparkling. She looked less
the child, Oscar thought, and more the woman than when he had seen
her last. He had been struck by this when he first saw her on board
the boat. He had thought the same thing many times that day as the
thundering express bore them from Plymouth to London. Now they were
alone in Sheila’s room in the hotel where they were to spend the night.
A big fire blazed on the hearth. The curtains were drawn, and brother
and sister were alone together. The rumble in the streets below made a
ceaseless murmur, but it was different from the rattle and roar of the
train. They could talk at their ease now.

On the way up to town Sheila had poured her whole history into Oscar’s
ears, and had heard the story of his own trouble at home, and the
shadow which rested upon him. She had not said much, there had been no
excited outburst such as he had expected. Perhaps the presence of other
people in the carriage was a check upon her, or perhaps she had learned
something of the lesson of self-control and reticence.

Anyway she had been unwontedly quiet during the last hours of the
journey, and Oscar, who had felt very weary after his long hasty night
journey down to Plymouth, had dozed in his corner. But now, after
their arrival here, after their substantial meal below, they had come
upstairs for a confidential talk which had been impossible before.

“Oscar, I have thought it all out. It came to me first on ship-board,
even before I knew anything about you and what had happened in the
office. (Why didn’t you tell me in your letters?) I made up my mind
then and there that I would never, never, never live at Cossart Place
again. Aunt Cossart has behaved infamously to me. She has tried to
spoil my life and make me always wretched and miserable. I will never
forgive her. I will never see her again!”

Oscar looked straight at his sister, but said nothing, for Sheila was
proceeding with her old impetuosity.

“You can’t understand what it was like there. Even Mrs. Reid understood
and was indignant. Oh, yes, I know she was, by the little things she
said, though, of course, she would not say much. Everybody knew. I feel
as though I could never bear to see any of them again. She is a hateful
woman. The Barretts told me how furious people were with her when they
knew she was going to send me home. Everybody guessed why—that was the
horridest part of it. And I had been so happy. Everybody was so kind,
and I had to go without even saying good-bye, but I felt I couldn’t—I
couldn’t! The Barrett girls declared they believed everybody would cut
them for it. I’m sure I hope they will! Oh, I can’t help being angry—I
can’t indeed!”

“Sheila dear, don’t get excited,” said Oscar soothingly. “I can
understand that it was very hard. It is very hard to be misunderstood,
and to have things put down to us that we know we have not done, but we
have talked over all that before. Tell me about this plan of yours.”

“Oh, yes. Oscar, you will be twenty-one soon, won’t you?”

“Yes. What has that to do with it?”

“Everything, for you will have command over our money then.”

“Yes; at least over my half, anyway, perhaps over it all. But it is not
much, Sheila.”

“I know it is not; but it is enough to make us a little home. Now
listen, Oscar, for I have it all planned out. You shall go on at the
office if you must, because it’s something to do, and Uncle Tom has
been kind in a way, though if he suspects you—however, we won’t talk
any more about that. But we won’t go on living with the Cossarts any
more, I’m quite determined on that. We shall have enough to have a
little home of our own, even if it’s only a lodging; and you will go to
the office, and I’ll try and get some music pupils, or little children
to teach in the mornings, or something to help. And I’ll keep our home
as nice as possible, and we’ll have cosy evenings together, and we’ll
have nothing to do with the people who have behaved so badly to us. Oh,
I don’t mean that we’ll cut them or anything, but we won’t go on living
with them and eating their bread. I couldn’t possibly dream of going
back to Cossart Place ever; and they don’t want me at Uncle Tom’s, and
besides, how could I go on living in the same house with that Cyril? I
can’t think how you can do it, Oscar, I really can’t.”

Sheila leant forward with flushed cheeks and shining eyes. Oscar was
leaning back in his chair, his face a little in the shadow. Sheila
had been struck on first seeing him with the sharpened look of his
features, and the tired expression in his eyes; the same thing struck
her again more forcibly at this moment, although she spoke no word of
it.

“Say you think it a nice plan, Oscar, for I’m sure you do!” she cried
eagerly.

“No, Sheila, I don’t think it would do,” he said slowly.

“Oh, Oscar, what do you mean? I’m sure it would. We should be so happy
together, you and I. And it’s often so horrid being with people who
misunderstand us. I think we’ve had enough of that. Oh, don’t say you
won’t think of it!”

“I am thinking of it, Sheila, I’m thinking hard, for I hate to thwart
you; but I don’t think it would do, and you would find that living in
a very small way, and trying to earn something yourself, are two very
difficult matters for people brought up as we have been.”

“But, Oscar, we should belong to ourselves and each other. We should be
free from those horrid things that happen in other people’s houses.”

“But we should have other troubles and worries to face, Sheila. And do
you know, I think it would not only be very ungrateful to our relations
to take ourselves off like that, but I think it would be very bad for
us ourselves.”

“Bad for us? I don’t understand.”

“I think it is always bad for people to rebel too much against the life
which—well—which God seems to have arranged for them. Sheila, don’t you
think that in the old days you and I had rather too much of our own
way?”

“I never thought about it—did we?”

“I think so. Everything was made so smooth for us, and we had so few
battles to fight. I sometimes think it might have been better for us
if we had had more. Sheila, take my case; it is true I know nothing
about this lost money, but in one sense the fault is mine. I always did
the thing that was the easiest and pleasantest at the moment, though
North warned me again and again that my easy-going ways were slovenly,
and might lead to confusion and worse. I never quite believed him, and
never seriously tried to conquer my tendencies, and you see what has
happened. Whoever is to blame, the thing could not have been but for my
fault.”

“Well, I think that’s a very hard way of looking at it; but what then?”

“I have not quite finished, Sheila; I want to talk about your case.
It has been something the same with you, little sister. You have
always liked to drift along easily with the current, doing what was
pleasantest at the moment. If people were kind and made you welcome,
you responded to all their overtures, without always stopping to think
what Aunt Cossart would like, or if it were quite considerate to Effie.
They were quite small things, but little by little they made trouble;
and then came this great storm which has made you so miserable. You
were not to blame, as I was; I don’t think you were ever warned, and it
was difficult for you to see from day to day how things were going; but
I think perhaps, Sheila, we have both been selfish in our own way, and
have not thought enough——”

“You’re not selfish, you’re not careless,” cried Sheila interrupting
excitedly. “I only wish I were one quarter as good. Oh, Oscar, I do
believe I have been selfish, though I never meant it. I never thought
of such a thing. We have always been used to being happy—to have people
like us. It seemed so natural. I didn’t mean any harm.”

“No, Sheila, I am sure you didn’t; but you know life is not given to us
just to enjoy for ourselves. We must try and think of other people too,
to put them first. It is harder for you than for some, because father
always spoiled you; and everybody likes you, and you are so pretty and
fascinating.”

But Sheila jumped up and put her hand upon his lips.

“Don’t, Oscar! I don’t want to be praised; I begin to feel that I have
been rather naughty and selfish, though I wouldn’t believe it when my
conscience pricked now and then. I was wrong to be so furious with Aunt
Cossart. Sometimes it made me a little frightened—when I wanted to say
my prayers—and didn’t know how to get out ‘Forgive us our trespasses,
as we forgive—’ Oh, Oscar, I don’t think I’ve forgiven Aunt Cossart
yet. Suppose there had been a storm, and the vessel had sunk! How
dreadful that would have been!”

“You will forgive everything, Sheila, when you think about it a little
more. When we begin to understand how many faults we have ourselves, we
see that we must forgive, we can’t help it. Everything seems to sink
out of sight except the thought of His forgiveness of us, and what it
cost to win it.”

Sheila suddenly fell upon her knees before Oscar, and looked anxiously
into his face. It was seldom indeed he had spoken to her quite so
openly. A quick thrill of anxiety ran through her.

“Oscar, have you forgiven Cyril?”

“Yes,” he answered in a low voice. “Indeed, sometimes I think it is he
who has to forgive me more than I him. For remember, Sheila, it was my
carelessness that put in his way the opportunity—suggested, perhaps,
the temptation. When I think of that, I feel that it is I who need the
forgiveness.”

Sheila looked awed at the thought suggested—that terrible thought so
often overlooked and set aside, that not alone to ourselves do we sin
and do amiss; but that in some way or other our comrades and friends
may become involved in our wrong-doing.

“‘_Sic vos non vobis_,’” quoted Oscar in a dreamy fashion. “I begin to
understand those words, Sheila, as I never did before.”

“But it is rather dreadful, Oscar; it makes it seem as though our sins
went on and on so!”

“Yes, that is what I want to understand better. Our sins are forgiven,
but the effects of them so often go on and on. We must think of that,
too, Sheila; it will help to make our faults hateful to us. It will
make us more patient when we have to bear blame that we do not quite
merit; for how much more blame do we deserve than we ever get!”

Sheila was silent a long time, looking up into Oscar’s face.

“And my plan?” she asked tentatively.

“Would be a selfish one,” answered Oscar quickly, “for it would hurt
the feelings of our relations; and I think it would be a shirking of
the discipline of life, which we both stand in so much need of, Sheila!”

“You don’t.”

“Yes, I do. It would be very much pleasanter for us to have a little
independent crib of our own, where we should be able to indulge
ourselves and each other, and get away from all the little frictions
of life in a family where things are not done quite in the way we have
been used to. But it would be like running away from what seems to
have been given us to bear; and I expect we should find we soon had a
big new crop of worries and bothers, quite as big as the old ones. So
I think, Sheila, we will not force things ourselves. We will go back
to Uncle Tom’s, and wait and see what turns up. We will both try and
be patient, and do what is right, never minding whether or not it is
what we like best ourselves. We must try and learn the lesson of not
pleasing ourselves always. You know Who set us the example of that?”

Sheila subsided upon the floor, and laid her head on Oscar’s knee,
taking his hand between hers.

“You are getting so good, Oscar,” she said, “I am almost afraid of you.
You are not ill, are you?”

“Ill? No. Why do you ask?”

“Because you don’t look well, and when people are so very very good,
one sometimes fancies they are——”

Sheila paused, and Oscar said with a little tone of mirth in his quiet
voice—

“I am not going to die of goodness yet, Sheila! You need not be afraid
on that score.”

It was with a good deal of shrinking that Sheila prepared to face
the Cossarts on the morrow. She knew that they would by this time
have received the letter her aunt must have written, and that Mrs.
Cossart would not have drawn her picture with a very strict regard
to truth. She would have thought more of justifying her precipitate
action than of anything else; and Sheila was terribly sensitive
where Ronald Dumaresq was concerned, and felt as though any mention
of his name would be worse than the cut of a whip. And her cousins
were not sensitive on these points. They would be almost certain to
cross-question her and make a joke of everything.

It needed all her courage and resolution to face the meeting; but when
they drew up at the door and were met by Ray in the passage, it was not
of Sheila’s sudden return that the whole house was thinking. Indeed Ray
only gave her a rather hurried kiss, warm and sisterly, but distinctly
hasty, and then turned to Oscar and took him by the shoulders, bringing
him into the strong light of the window.

“Oscar, how are you? Are you sure you feel well?”

“Y—yes, all right, just a little tired with all the travelling, you
know. But what do you ask for?”

“Oh, we are in such a fright. Typhoid fever has broken out in the town.
The little office-boy you have been visiting so often has it; and
everybody was saying that you were looking ill. Five cases are reported
to-day, and they say there will be more. You are quite sure you are
well, Oscar? Sheila, did he eat his breakfast this morning?”

“He hardly ate anything either last night or to-day,” cried Sheila, in
sudden anxiety. “He has a bad headache. We thought it was from the long
journey.”

The girls stood looking at each other in dismay. The same fear was in
both hearts. Oscar turned from them and began climbing the stairs with
a strange languor in his movements.

“I think I’ll go to my room,” he said, “but don’t bother, I shall be
all right there.”

“He’s got it!” cried Ray, under her breath; and Sheila turned white to
the lips.

(_To be continued._)




OUR PUZZLE POEMS: AN ACCIDENTAL CYCLE.

FOREIGN AWARDS.


AN ACCIDENTAL CYCLE I.


_Prize Winners (Seven Shillings Each)._

    Polly Lawrance, Elridge, Belle Ville, St. Michael, Barbados.
    Mrs. G. Marrett, Hyderabad, Deccan, India.
    Helen Shilstone, Ellangowan, Fontabelle, Barbados.


_Very Highly Commended._

Ethel Beven (Ceylon), Nellie M. Daft (Portugal), Katy Donaldson
(France), Hilda Jonklaas (Ceylon), M. R. Laurie (Barbados), H. Low
(Canada), Florence Stephenson (Cape Town).


_Highly Commended._

Sadie Barrat (Canada), Louis E. Blazé (Ceylon), Elsie Davies
(Australia), L. Gamlen (France), Clara J. Hardy (Australia), J. W.
W. Hogan (Penang), Josephine E. Jones (Portugal), Jessie Mitchell
(Canada), Gertrude E. Moore (New Zealand), L. O’Sullivan (Rangoon),
Mrs. Talbot Smith (S. Australia), Mrs. Sprigg (Cape Colony), Mrs.
Waddington (Bermuda).


_Honourable Mention._

Mrs. H. Andrews (Canada), Maggie Glasgow (Australia), Mabel C. King
(Canada), Mrs. Hastings Ogilvie (Deccan), Mrs. W. T. Moore (Bengal), G.
Waterstrom (Australia), Gladys Wilding (New Zealand).

       *       *       *       *       *


AN ACCIDENTAL CYCLE II.


_Prize Winners (Seven Shillings Each)._

    Elizabeth M. Lang, 17, Rue Bayard, Pau, France.
    Maude Saunders, Ascott House, Church Street, Abbotsford, Melbourne.
    Helen Shilstone, Ellangowan, Fontabelle, Barbados.


_Most Highly Commended._

M. Browne (India), Clara J. Hardy, Edith Hardy (Australia), Agnes L.
Lewis (Switzerland), Elsie M. Otheman (New York), Mrs. Coupland Thomas
(California).


_Very Highly Commended._

Sadie Barrat (Canada), Florence L. Beeckman (New York), Elsie Binns
(New Jersey), Rose Creed (Lille), Nellie M. Daft (Lisbon), Elsie N.
Davies, Maggie Glasgow (Australia), Susan H. Greaves (Barbados),
J. W. W. Hogan (Penang), Anna I. Hood (France), Josephine E. Jones
(Portugal), Hilda Jonklaas (Ceylon), F. G. B. King, M. R. Laurie, Polly
Lawrance (Barbados), H. Low (Canada), Elizabeth MacPherson (Australia),
Gertrude E. Moore (New Zealand), James Roberts (Jamaica), Mrs. Rose
(India), John S. Sutherland (Antigua), Annie G. Taylor (Australia),
M. A. Thomas (California), Gena Thomson (Australia), Mrs. Waddington
(Bermuda), G. Waterstrom, Elsie M. Wylie (Australia).


_Highly Commended._

Mrs. H. Andrews (Canada), Florence E. Bapty (India), Hilda T. Batten
(New Zealand), Winifred Bizzey (Canada), Madeleine Bonzel (France),
Mrs. H. Campbell (Demerara), Grace Carmichael (Barbados), Lillian
Dobson (Australia), Clara Downs (Barbados), Emily H. Glass (India),
Annette M. Gray, Ruby Guest (Australia), L. Guibert (Mauritius),
Gertrude Hunt (New Zealand), May Koenig (Germany), Clara Lapata
(Brussels), Sarah Lewis (South Africa), Mrs. G. Marrett (India), Jessie
Mitchell (Canada), Lottie Moore (Australia), L. O’Sullivan, Hilda
D’Rozario (India), Mrs. Sprigg, Florence Stephenson (South Africa),
Emily Suttaby (Canada), Ada F. Sykes, Lucie K. Thompson, Herbert Traill
(India), Ethel M. Wilson (New Zealand).

       *       *       *       *       *


AN ACCIDENTAL CYCLE III.


_Prize Winners (Half-a-Guinea Each)._

    Elsie V. Davies, Wheatland Road, Malvern, Victoria, Australia.
    Edith Lewis, 200, De Grassi Street, Toronto, Canada.


_Very Highly Commended._

Jessie Arthur (New Zealand), Mrs. H. Campbell (Demerara), Florence
Deeth (France), Maude Gibney (Switzerland), Clara J. Hardy, Edith Hardy
(Australia), Mabel C. King (Canada), M. R. Laurie, Polly Lawrance
(Barbados), Mrs. Manners (India), Gertrude E. Moore (New Zealand),
Mrs. E. E. Murray (Australia), Helen Shilstone (Barbados), Mrs. Talbot
Smith (S. Australia), Emily Suttah (Canada), Ada F. Sykes (India),
Annie G. Taylor (Australia), Mrs. Waddington (Bermuda), Mrs. J. Whitton
(Tasmania).


_Highly Commended._

Florence E. Bapty (India), Rose Creed (France), Emily H. Glass (India),
Ethel L. Glendenning (New Zealand), Louise Guibert (Mauritius),
Gertrude Hunt (New Zealand), J. W. W. Hogan (Penang), Nellie M.
Jenkinson (Australia), Hilda Jonklaas (Ceylon), May Koenig (Germany),
Elizabeth M. Lang (France), Clara Lapata (Brussels), Mrs. G. Marrett,
Mrs. Hastings Ogilvie, Hilda D’Rozario (India), Maud Saunders
(Australia), John S. Sutherland (Antigua), Lucie K. Thompson (India),
G. Waterstrom, Jessie M. Webster (Australia).




QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS.


TRAINING IN HOUSEWIFERY.—“_As a regular and appreciative reader of THE
GIRL’S OWN PAPER, I have become much interested in the question of
higher grade housekeeping. I have obtained the consent of my parents
to enter a home to be trained. Would you kindly furnish me with the
addresses of some establishments where training is given?_—KATE.”

“Kate’s” determination to equip herself thoroughly for the duties
of housekeeping, is a most wise one. The girl who is trained in all
departments of domestic work can turn her knowledge to account in
every situation in life in which she may be placed, and is never
likely to find the problem of earning her bread a difficult one.
“Kate,” doubtless, knows already the National Training School of
Cookery and Domestic Economy, Buckingham Palace Road. This institution
is principally intended for the training of teachers, and we judge
from “Kate’s” letter that in her case a school would be preferred
that trains girls specifically for domestic employment. A School
of Housewifery and Domestic Science of this kind has lately been
established in connection with the North Hackney High School for
Girls, at 101, Stamford Hill, N. “Kate” would be well advised to visit
this school and see the classes at work. In the country are many
excellent schools. Good housewifery training can be obtained at several
institutions in the country. The following are all well recommended:
Belsize House, Brunswick Square, Gloucester, in connection with the
Gloucestershire School of Cookery and Domestic Economy, principal,
Miss Florence Baddeley; Camp End School for Household Training, near
Malvern, conducted by Miss Buck and Miss Brander; Fryerne School of
Household Management, Fryerne, Caterham, principal, Miss Mitchell;
and the Wiltshire School of Cookery and Domestic Economy, Trowbridge,
secretary, Miss A. Bridgman. At each of these institutions, resident
pupils are received, and the course of training consists not only of
cookery, but of household work generally.


BOOK ILLUSTRATION.—“_I have taken lessons in drawing and painting for
five years, and except for holding a second-class certificate instead
of a first in one subject, I have gained the art class teacher’s
certificate. Just lately I have been taking lessons in black and white
work, and should like to become a book-illustrator._—J. L. R.”

We do not wish to damp the hopes of “J. L. R.,” but it takes much more
than lessons in the technique of black and white drawing to make a
book-illustrator. Girls who become successful illustrators show early
a real talent for drawing. They can not only copy an object before
them, but they can express in a few strokes certain clever, effective,
or humorous ideas, which are born within their own brain. Without the
possession of this rare gift, we could not advise a girl to turn her
thoughts towards book-illustration or even towards drawing of any
kind, if it is necessary for her to earn money by it. All the best
illustrators, fashion artists, designers of covers, etc., seem to be
agreed that an artist cannot be taught much more than the principles
of drawing, but that everything else must be acquired by the individual
through constant study and thought. No doubt the beginner is much
helped by observing good illustrative work, and even by trying to
copy it. It is also a good plan to enter for some of the competitions
which are held by the editors of the art magazines. We would, however,
seek to dissuade “J. L. R.” from becoming a teacher of art, as it is
most difficult for all but the most gifted women to obtain permanent
employment as teachers of drawing and painting alone.


_A correspondent, E. A. E., asks the association connected with the
words “Quo vadis?”_

When the persecution under Nero first broke out in Rome, the tradition
runs that St. Peter was persuaded by his friends to flee from the city.
He was hurrying along the Appian Way, when suddenly he was encountered
face to face by his risen Lord. In amazement he asked, “_Domine, quo
vadis?_” (Master, whither goest Thou?) “I go to Rome,” was the answer,
“to be crucified afresh.” “But, Lord, wast Thou not crucified once for
all?” “I saw thee fleeing from death,” replied the Master, “and I go to
be crucified in thy stead.” Abashed at the implied rebuke, St. Peter
turned again, cheered by the Divine utterance, “Fear not, for I am with
thee.” A little church now marks the legendary site of the interview.
This beautiful story is given by Origen, and is also found in the “Acts
of Peter and Paul” in _Apocryphal Writings_ (Ante-Nicene fathers).




ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.


GIRLS’ EMPLOYMENTS.

MARY H. C. (_Stewardess_).—The position of stewardess is not easy
for a girl to obtain who has no connection with steamship companies.
The companies usually prefer for these appointments the widows or
daughters of employees. It is not also a position for which quite a
young girl would be thought eligible. We think your parents are very
wise in desiring you to know a trade, as an employment of this kind
can always be practised; but there is, as you say, the difficulty that
many trades which girls can adopt are of a sedentary character, and
might not suit you for that reason. How would you like dairy-work? This
is a good business to know, as girls who can take charge of dairies
or teach dairy-work are often wanted. You could be well taught in the
Reading Agricultural College (where you might also learn poultry and
bee-keeping), at the County Council Dairy Institute, Worleston, near
Nantwich, Cheshire, or at the Midland Dairy Institute, Kingston, Notts.
Laundry-work also is a most remunerative business to anyone who has
been trained for the post of manageress in a steam laundry; but as you
are not very strong, this might not prove a desirable occupation for
you.

BLACKAMOOR (_Companion, etc._).—1. You are one of our quite young
readers, we divine, and so perhaps will not take it amiss if we observe
that your spelling is a trifle weak; but as you write carefully this
will doubtless soon be improved. When you are older, we think you will
give up the idea of becoming a lady’s companion, and think it rather a
poor employment. Some girls make themselves valued in this capacity,
but they are young women who understand household duties thoroughly,
and can, as the expression goes, turn their hand to anything. But we
should like you to try in preference to do some one thing well, in
particular, as this is the more useful faculty nowadays.—2. Your second
question shows that you have the laudable ambition of a true Scottish
girl to become well educated. You aspire to obtain a “bursary,” or, as
we call it in England, a “scholarship,” at some school whence you could
eventually proceed to Girton. The St. Leonard’s School at St. Andrew’s
is a particularly good one. We advise you to write to the Principal,
asking her whether any bursaries are offered by the school for which
you could compete. You could also obtain some useful preliminary
instruction through the St. George’s Oral and Correspondence Classes,
of which the secretary is Miss S. E. Murray, 5, Melville Street,
Edinburgh. Pupils are helped in home study through these classes, and
also prepared for the Edinburgh Local Examinations.

K. L. (_Journalistic Work in China or Japan_).—China would offer no
field for journalistic employment to girls of nineteen, and is almost
the last country to select. Japan would be much safer, but we doubt
whether it would offer much field for journalistic work. If you wish
to become a journalist, surely, as your home is in Canada, it would be
much wiser to try the United States. You could at all events obtain
journalistic experience there, and a few years later you would be in
a better position to judge whether the East could offer you congenial
employment. No doubt if you did not require to earn money, it might be
quite possible to gratify your wish for Oriental travel; but as this
is not the case you would only be encountering insuperable obstacles
by trying at your age to introduce Western ideas concerning girls’
employment into the East.

DOLLY VARDEN (_Telephone Clerkship_).—You wish to know at what age
girls can be received into a telephone office. The National Telephone
Company accepts girls between the ages of seventeen and nineteen.
Their height, it is stipulated, must be not less than 5 feet 3 inches.
They must bring with them two letters of recommendation and a doctor’s
certificate. Good education and pronunciation are also demanded. Clerks
are engaged on a monthly agreement, and are received at first on
probation without payment, and afterwards at 5s. a week for half-time,
namely four hours a day. When engaged for full time, that is, eight
hours a day, less time for luncheon and tea, they are paid 5s. a week,
rising by 1s. a week yearly to 15s. Promotion to higher and better paid
work is accorded to suitable girls in order of seniority. We rather
fear that the complaint from which you have suffered might prove to be
an obstacle in your way, as the duties of a telephone clerk entail much
standing.

MAY DÉSIRÉE (_Telephone Clerkship_).—See reply to “Dolly Varden,” in
which we have dealt with this employment fully.

TOPSY (_Stewardess, etc._).—1. Positions as stewardess are only to be
obtained through the steamship companies; but would it not be wiser,
Topsy, to remain a dairy-maid as you are at present? A girl who knows
dairy-work is useful in all parts of the country and colonies, and has
a far better chance of earning her living, if she loses a situation,
than a stewardess out of place.—2. Used postage stamps have no value.


MEDICAL.

FELICITAS.—You cannot be too careful about the baby’s bottle. We
suppose the bottle is of value, but it is responsible for so much
suffering and illness of infants that we really doubt whether we would
not be better without it. There are two forms of baby’s bottles,
the old-fashioned torpedo-shaped bottle, clumsy, troublesome, and
inconvenient, but withal possible to clean, and necessitating careful
feeding, and the newer “Alexandra” bottle, convenient, no trouble,
æsthetic, but impossible to keep clean, and allowing carelessness in
feeding the infant. Never use the new bottle—it is quite impossible to
clean india-rubber; the bottle gets dirty, sour milk collects in the
tube, the child gets dyspepsia, and may die simply from a dirty bottle.
You must not let a child suck at the bottle at all hours of the day
and night, “just to keep it quiet and allow its mother a little rest.”
Children must be fed regularly. The habit of giving children things
to eat or suck to keep them quiet is responsible for a vast number of
deaths and lives of misery and uselessness. Indeed, it is not too much
to say that this pernicious practice of giving babies something to eat
or drink to prevent them from crying is more fatal to infants than all
the infectious diseases from which they suffer put together. You must
keep the bottle clean, and immediately after use rinse it out with
boiling water, and keep it soaking in boracic acid solution, and again
rinse it out with hot water before using it.

BONNIE.—1. The reason why it is easy for you to breathe through your
nose during the day, but difficult to do so at night, is that the
recumbent position causes the mucous membrane of the nose to become
congested. The nose always becomes congested when the person is lying
down, but the amount of obstruction varies very greatly even in health.
Of course, in the absolutely healthy condition, the congestion is never
sufficient to prevent breathing through the nose. But a very slight
cause may make nose-breathing quite impossible at night. The best
treatment for such conditions is an extra pillow and a nasal spray of
menthol in paraleine (1 in 8). Even in health it is the rule to breathe
through the nose and the mouth after severe exertions.—2. A hair-wash
of quinine, rosemary, and cantharides, is a good preparation to
prevent the hair from falling out, that is, it is as good as any other
hair-wash. Of course, nothing whatever applied to the hair itself can
have the slightest influence on its growth. The remedy must be applied
either through the blood or to the hair roots in order to be effective.
Quinine often causes headache if taken internally; applied externally
it would not have this action. It would not darken the hair. Try borax
or very dilute carbolic acid (1 in 1000) to wash your hair with.

MOLLY.—By the “eye tooth” is usually meant the canine or “dog tooth,”
the third in order from the middle line of the mouth. By some persons
the first molar or first double tooth in the upper jaw, or the sixth
from the middle line, is called the “eye tooth,” and with greater
reason than the canine, for the first molar is more connected with
the eye than is the canine. Extracting the canine tooth is of no more
danger than extracting any other tooth, but as its root is rather long,
it is a little more difficult. There are thirty-two teeth in the adult
jaw, eight on each side of both upper and lower jaws.

HESTER.—You object to our statement that eczema is a local disease,
and is not usually dependent upon the state of the blood, because you
feel ill when you have an acute attack of eczema and are relieved by
internal treatment. But this does not affect our statement that eczema
is a local disease due to a local inoculation, and is not due to
disease of the blood. We suppose you will admit that a severe burn is
a local injury, and that that, at least, is not due to “something in
the blood.” Well, often in a severe burn the constitutional symptoms
are desperate. We may have to confine all our attention to the heart
and nervous system at first when treating a severe burn. But still we
maintain that the burn is a local injury, and by local means alone can
the burn be made to heal. And so with eczema. Here is a local disease,
but the constitutional symptoms may be, although they very rarely
are, severe. And occasionally they do need internal treatment. But no
internal treatment will cause the eczema to heal without external aid.
The treatment for all local disease must be local, although internal
medication may be required as well.

A COUNTRY LASS.—Wild honey is often poisonous. That made by bumble-bees
is usually harmful, giving rise to severe headache, purging, and
vomiting. Xenophon, in his _Anabasis_, accurately describes the effects
produced upon his soldiers by eating wild honey, probably made by bees
from the Pontic azalea.

E. F. T.—Try an ointment of ichthiol (2 per cent.), and a wash of
carbolic acid (1 in 100). You must be very careful that the carbolic
acid does not get into your eyes and mouth.


STUDY AND STUDIO.

⁂ We may remind our subscribers that there are in connection with the
Royal Academy of Music, Tenterden Street, Hanover Square, London, W.,
twenty-one exhibitions and scholarships, which in most cases entitle
the winners to three years’ free instruction at the Academy. The next
election for the Henry Smart Scholarship is for female candidates, and
will take place at the Royal Academy of Music on Monday, September
25th, 1899. The subjects of examination will be organ-playing and
composition. The John Thomas Welsh Scholarship will be competed for
on Friday, September 22nd, 1899. Full particulars of these and other
scholarships can be obtained of the Secretary, Royal Academy of Music.

SEA-FOAM (Chefoo, N. China).—Many thanks for your modest and
interesting letter. We regret the delay in offering criticism upon
your poems, but can now say that they are very thoughtful, and are
not marked by any of the blemishes in construction which we have
often to point out to our correspondents. Blank verse, however, is a
difficult medium for the novice, and we think “The Rainbow” is your
most successful effort. The idea expressed in “Influence” is very
good. On p. 2 you use “e’en yet” and “still” together. Only one of
the expressions is necessary. You also use “lives” and “endeth” with
the same nominative. You should either say “liveth” and “endeth,” or
“lives” and “ends.” Never let your words be obviously shaped by the
length of a line. “An unspoken thought” is striking. We should advise
you to study the laws of versification, and to persevere, selecting
some other metre, to begin with, than the ambitious blank verse.

ONE BY ONE.—We repeat our apology to you. Your sketch of Teddie is
pathetic, but shows, as you yourself observe, that you have not studied
the laws of composition. On the first page there are far too many
“ands,” and it is better not to write of “the joyous little birdies
with their bright plumage and their sweet, sweet notes.” (We do not
think that the English song-birds are remarkable for gay plumage.) You
should procure Dr. Abbot’s little book _How to Write Clearly_, and read
a good deal of good prose and poetry.

LOUISA GREGORY.—You need to study writing and spelling before you
attempt to compose stories. We advise you daily to copy some extract
for the sake of learning to spell, and also to practise writing in a
copy-book, to teach you to form your letters correctly.


INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENCE.

MARIQUITA, aged 14, wishes to correspond with a French girl about her
own age, each writing in the other’s language; the letters would be
corrected and returned. Address, 33, Hawthorn Bank, Marslands Road,
Sale, near Manchester.

A BUSH GIRL, Queensland, Australia, would like to correspond with “AN
ANXIOUS ONE” and “ARMENIAN SWEET SEVENTEEN,” Smyrna. Will they forward
us their addresses for “A BUSH GIRL” to see?

MISS GERTRUDE DICKSON, King Street, Bangalore, Mysore, India, will
be glad to correspond with Miss François. We published the latter’s
address, so Miss Dickson might have written direct. She is a collector
of stamps; and, if Miss François has found a correspondent—which is
probable—would be glad to hear in English from any other reader of THE
GIRL’S OWN PAPER.

A PROPINQUER, who collects foreign view post-cards, would be very glad
to exchange some with “O MIMOSA SAN,” if she will send her address.

MISS QUEENIE CLARKE, Hillside House, Rawtenstall, Manchester, would
like to correspond in French with MISS GIGIA RICCIARDI (March).

LIZZIE VAN REES, aged 17, Hilversum, Holland, wishes to correspond with
GRETE FROMBERG, Berlin, and with an English girl of her own age.

MISS EDITH WOGAMAN, Curra Creek, _viâ_ Wellington, New South Wales
(19), wishes to correspond with “MISS INQUISITIVE” or another “nice
girl.”

MISS KATE PROUT, Bolarum, Deccan, India (19) would like an English girl
to write to her at once, and “hopes they will be great friends.”

MISS BEATRICE MILLER, 2, Talbot Villas, Prince’s Road, Buckhurst Hill,
Essex, would like to correspond with a French girl. She is fond of
painting, but backward in French. Letters should be corrected and
returned.

JANET and GRACE COUPER, aged 16 and 14, would like to correspond and
exchange stamps with girls in the West Indies, India, Holland, and
Central America. Address, Te Waikaha, Havelock, Hawkes Bay, New Zealand.

MISS DAISY BOUVERIE (18) would like to correspond with an American
young lady. Address, 514, Commercial Road, Landport, Portsmouth.

MISS NICHOLLS, Laburnum Villa, Leamington, would be pleased to
correspond with an Italian lady interested in art, science, or
literature—both writing in Italian.


MISCELLANEOUS.

INSECTO.—The beetles have been so crushed that it is not easy to say
absolutely what they are. But we think there can be very little doubt
that they are _Anobium domesticum_, a wood-boring beetle very common
in old houses. The boring is, of course, the work of the larvæ, which
are believed to take often three years to come to perfection and
change into the pupæ—the little round holes being the open ends of
their galleries. Canon Fowler says, “They may, to a great extent, be
got rid of by the application of benzine, with which a small quantity
of carbolic acid has been mixed;” if they have bored into furniture
which is delicately polished, “the benzine had better be applied alone.
Unpolished furniture would be best freed from the pest by immersion
in boiling water, if the articles are not too unwieldy to admit of
such treatment. Moderately strong carbolic acid will at once destroy
both grubs, eggs, and perfect insects, but the furniture to which
it is applied will require re-polishing.” As the query is as to the
destruction of floor-boards, we should think the carbolic acid would
not be difficult.

AN IMPOVERISHED ONE.—We know of nothing to remove the black marks,
unless French chalk may answer the purpose. Scrape a little on them at
the back and try.

DOLLY.—The smoking of your lamp may be prevented by a little more
effort at thorough cleanliness. Take out the wick, soak it in vinegar,
dry it well, and cut it exactly straight. Wash the lamp in soda-water,
and when you fill it with oil, put a few little pieces of camphor in
the latter, as this will improve the light. To whiten the dirty-looking
boards, use newly-slaked lime—one part—and three parts of white sand.
Another method is to apply moistened fuller’s earth thickly over the
stains, and, after about twenty-four hours, rub it in gently, and then
clear it off. A third plan is to lay chloride of lime on the boards,
damp it frequently, and then wash them well with soda-water.

BIRDY.—We quite sympathise with you in the feeling of indignation
aroused at seeing the quantity of little skylarks that cover the
counters of poulterers in London. Much is said, and great efforts are
made, with reference to the slaughter of birds for bonnet decoration.
But women’s vanity is not alone to be censured for the destruction
of birds with beautiful plumage. The larks and thrushes and other
singing birds find a market to supply the tables of men’s clubs. It
was calculated some time ago that upwards of 40,000 skylarks were sent
up from the country every day during the season, and before long, at
this rate, the little bird which called forth the genius of Shelley,
Wordsworth, and others of our poets, and inspired such exquisite odes,
will become a rare specimen amongst our native songsters. The law
should be a stringent one against the destruction of any songster.

M. G. G.—Return the withdrawal order to the Head Office in London if
you wish it to be cancelled. Address the letter “Savings Bank, G. P. O.,
London,” unstamped, saying you wish it to be cancelled. Many thanks to
the Parochial Nurse.

HARMONY.—We should think that a daily paper would be the best for your
advertisement. That is where people usually look, we believe. Very few
take an exclusively musical journal unless extremely interested in the
subject.

J. NELSON.—We see no reason why you should not give your clergyman
a parting present, though it is difficult to say what it should be,
unless we knew to what part of the world he was going. Something simple
and useful is generally the best. Hairbrushes in a case, a box of nice
soap, some handkerchiefs, an old-fashioned housewife well filled,
half-a-dozen bedroom towels marked in embroidery; all of these would be
useful. But you could ask some intimate friend to tell you exactly what
he needed, and you might get a good suggestion in that way.

CURIOUS.—The observation you have made respecting the retreat of the
glacier at Grindelwald is quite correct. Some years ago the distance to
be ascended to reach it was not nearly so great as it now is. But this
is not an isolated case. The gradual retreat of the glacier is general,
and in proportion the higher limit of vegetation is coming down. The
rhododendron, which formerly ranged up to 2,350 metres some twenty
years ago, now reaches only to 2,000. M. Martin ascribes this change to
the fact that there is less snow, and less protection against the cold
in winter, and less moisture during the heat of summer. The vines do
not grow as high as formerly. The mountaineers do not reside at such
altitudes as they once did.

A. R.—The stork is a fatal enemy to snakes, and indeed so are all the
birds of the marshes, for they check their prodigious multiplication.
It is true that snakes may be perhaps a little repulsive in appearance,
but they perform great services in the economy of nature, for they make
incessant war on the worms and insects which abound in the slimy mud of
the swamps in which they generally make their abode. The storks always
make their nests on roofs and chimneys.

F. Q. M. J. E.—When a widow marries again, she certainly requires
wedding-cards, and she would put the name she bore during her first
marriage on her cards, and not her maiden name, unless under peculiar
and exceptional circumstances.




OUR NEW PUZZLE POEM.


[Illustration]

⁂ PRIZES to the amount of six guineas (one of which will be reserved
for competitors living abroad) are offered for the best solutions of
the above Puzzle Poem. The following conditions must be observed:—

1. Solutions to be written on one side of the paper only.

2. Each paper to be headed with the name and address of the competitor.

3. Attention must be paid to spelling, punctuation, and neatness.

4. Send by post to Editor, GIRL’S OWN PAPER, 56, Paternoster Row,
London. “Puzzle Poem” to be written on the top left-hand corner of the
envelope.

5. The last day for receiving solutions from Great Britain and Ireland
will be October 16, 1899; from Abroad, December 16, 1899.

The competition is open to all without any restrictions as to sex or
age.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Transcriber’s Note—the following changes have been made to this text.

Page 767: county to country—“country to select”.]

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIRL'S OWN PAPER, VOL. XX, NO.
1026, AUGUST 26, 1899 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
