The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Journal of the American-Irish Historical
Society (Vol. VII), by Thomas Hamilton Murray

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society (Vol. VII)

Editor: Thomas Hamilton Murray

Release Date: September 2, 2021 [eBook #66207]

Language: English


Produced by: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images
             made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN-IRISH
HISTORICAL SOCIETY (VOL. VII) ***

[Illustration:

  REAR-ADMIRAL JOHN McGOWAN, U.S.N. (Retired).

  PRESIDENT-GENERAL OF THE SOCIETY, 1906–1907.
]




                              THE JOURNAL
                                 OF THE
                   AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.


                                   BY

                        THOMAS HAMILTON MURRAY,

                          _Secretary-General_.


                              VOLUME VII.


                             BOSTON, MASS.,
                       PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY,
                                 1907.

[Illustration]




                        BY WAY OF INTRODUCTION.


I take great pleasure in here presenting Volume VII of the JOURNAL of
the American-Irish Historical Society. It is hoped the book will be
found equal, in point of general interest, to those preceding it and
helpful to the organization to whose labors and progress it is devoted.
The Society continues in a prosperous condition, has no indebtedness,
and is steadily adding new members to its roll. The historical papers
contained in this work will be recognized as of more than usual value,
while the historical notes and other material will, we are confident, be
likewise fully appreciated.

                                        Sincerely,
                                                T. H. MURRAY,
                                                    _Secretary-General_.

 BOSTON, MASS., December 31, 1907.




                  OFFICERS OF THE SOCIETY, A. D. 1907.


                          _President-General_,
            =Rear-Admiral John McGowan, U. S. N.= (retired),
                           Washington, D. C.

                       _Vice-President-General_,
                      =Hon. Franklin M. Danaher=,
                             Albany, N. Y.

                          _Secretary-General_,
                       =Thomas Hamilton Murray=,
                    Seaview, Plymouth County, Mass.

                          _Treasurer-General_,
                          =Michael F. Dooley=,
                           Providence, R. I.

                       _Librarian and Archivist_,
                          =Thomas B. Lawler=,
                             New York City.


                           EXECUTIVE COUNCIL,

                           The foregoing and

 =Hon. John D. Crimmins=, New York City.
 =Hon. William McAdoo=, New York City.
 =Hon. Thomas J. Gargan=, Boston, Mass.
 =Patrick F. Magrath=, Binghamton, N. Y.
 =Rev. John J. McCoy, LL. D.=, Worcester, Mass.
 =Thomas Addis Emmet, M. D., LL. D.=, New York City.
 =Edward J. McGuire=, New York City.
 =John F. O’Connell=, Providence, R. I.
 =James L. O’Neill=, Elizabeth, N. J.
 =Stephen Farrelly=, New York City.
 =Cyrus Townsend Brady, LL. D.=, Toledo, O.
 =Hon. Thomas J. Lynch=, Augusta, Me.
 =Gen. Phelps Montgomery=, New Haven, Conn.
 =Hon. Thomas Z. Lee=, Providence, R. I.
 =Hon. Patrick Garvan=, Hartford, Conn.
 =Major John Crane=, New York City.
 =Col. John McManus=, Providence, R. I.
 =Hon. William Gorman=, Philadelphia, Pa.
 =Col. C. C. Sanders=, Gainesville, Ga.
 =John F. Doyle=, New York City.


                         STATE VICE-PRESIDENTS.

 Maine—=James Cunningham=, Portland.
 New Hampshire—=Hon. James F. Brennan=, Peterborough.
 Vermont—=John D. Hanrahan, M. D.=, Rutland.
 Massachusetts—=M. J. Jordan=, Boston.
 Rhode Island—=Thomas A. O’Gorman=, Providence.
 Connecticut—=Dennis H. Tierney=, Waterbury.
 New York—=Joseph I. C. Clarke=, New York City.
 New Jersey—=John F. Kehoe=, Newark.
 Pennsylvania—=Hugh McCaffrey=, Philadelphia.
 Delaware—=John J. Cassidy=, Wilmington.
 Virginia—=James W. McCarrick=, Norfolk.
 West Virginia—=John F. Healy=, Thomas, Tucker County.
 South Carolina—=W. J. O’Hagan=, Charleston.
 Georgia—=Capt. John Flannery=, Savannah.
 Ohio—=John Lavelle=, Cleveland.
 Illinois—=Hon. P. T. Barry=, Chicago.
 Indiana—=Very Rev. Andrew Morrissey, C. S. C.=, Notre Dame.
 Iowa—=Rt. Rev. Philip J. Garrigan, D. D.=, Sioux City.
 Montana—=Rt. Rev. M. C. Lenihan, D. D.=, Great Falls.
 Minnesota—=Hon. C. D. O’Brien=, St. Paul.
 Kentucky—=John J. Slattery=, Louisville.
 Kansas—=Patrick H. Coney=, Topeka.
 Utah—=Joseph Geoghegan=, Salt Lake City.
 Texas—=Gen. A. G. Malloy=, El Paso.
 California—=James Connolly=, Coronado.


                         OTHER VICE-PRESIDENTS.

 District of Columbia—=Hon. Edward A. Moseley=, Washington.
 Oklahoma—=Joseph F. Swords=, Sulphur.
 Canada—=Hon. Felix Carbray=, Quebec.
 Ireland—=Dr. Michael F. Cox=, Dublin.

[Illustration:

  MR. P. F. MAGRATH.

  Binghamton, N. Y.

  A MEMBER OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL AND A LIFE MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY.
]




               THE ANNUAL MEETING AND DINNER, A. D. 1907.


The annual meeting and dinner of the Society took place in Boston,
Mass., on Thursday evening, January 24, 1907. The following is a copy of
the notice issued for the event:


                   AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.

                 NOTICE OF THE ANNUAL MEETING AND DINNER.

  DEAR SIR: The annual meeting and dinner of the American-Irish
  Historical Society will take place at the Hotel Brunswick, Boylston
  Street, Boston, Mass., on Thursday evening, January 24, 1907.

  A committee will be on duty at the hotel all day to receive members
  and guests, especially those coming from other cities and states, and
  render them such assistance as may be desired. A general reception
  will take place in the evening from 5 to 6 o’clock, upon the
  conclusion of which the annual meeting of the Society will be held.
  The annual dinner will be at 7.30 p. m.

  This will be the tenth anniversary of the Society, and it is eminently
  appropriate that its celebration should take place in Boston, the city
  where the organization was founded. These annual gatherings of the
  Society are always of very great interest, bring together a
  distinguished company, and are long remembered by those participating.
  The forthcoming event will be no exception to the rule.

  Tickets to the dinner are now ready at $3.50 each. They can be
  obtained by addressing Mr. M. J. Jordan, 42 Court Street, Boston,
  Mass. Make checks payable to the American-Irish Historical Society and
  forward to Mr. Jordan at the address given.

  Members are at liberty to invite personal guests. The evening
  reception committee will include the following Boston members of the
  Society: Capt. D. J. Gorman, Bernard J. Joyce, Michael H. Cox, Patrick
  M. Keating, J. W. Fogarty, P. A. O’Connell, Charles V. Dasey, T. B.
  Fitzpatrick, P. H. Powers, John E. Gilman, Hon. Joseph H. O’Neil, W.
  B. Sullivan, F. L. Dunne, P. B. Magrane and James W. Kenney.

  We hope that all who possibly can will be with us on this occasion, as
  it is desired to make it a red-letter event in the history of the
  Society.

                                          Fraternally,
                                                  JOHN MCGOWAN,
                                                    _President-General_,
                                                      Washington, D. C.

  T. H. MURRAY,
    _Secretary-General_,
      48 Carlton Road,
        Seaview, Mass.

    January 1, 1907.

The event was a very successful one and was participated in by a large
gathering. Owing to the unavoidable absence of Admiral McGowan, the
president-general of the Society, the business session was presided over
by Mr. M. F. Dooley of Providence, R. I., treasurer-general of the
organization.

Mr. T. H. Murray, secretary-general of the Society, was present, but
owing to illness was assisted in his duties by Mr. P. F. Magrath of
Binghamton, N. Y.

The reading of the minutes of the preceding annual meeting was omitted.

The annual report of the secretary-general was presented, accepted and
adopted, as was that of the treasurer-general. Both reports showed the
Society to be in an excellent condition.

Several new members were admitted to the organization.

The annual election of officers then took place, the result being as
given on pages 5 and 6 of this volume. The business session was then
dissolved, and after an interval the company proceeded to the annual
dinner.

Mr. Thomas B. Fitzpatrick of Boston, the well-known merchant, presided.
On his right and left were seated the Hon. John Hannan, mayor of
Ogdensburg, N. Y.; the Hon. Charles E. Gorman, Providence, R. I.; the
Hon. Joseph H. O’Neil, president of the Federal Trust Co., Boston; Mr.
M. F. Dooley, of the Union Trust Co., Providence, R. I.; the Hon. Joseph
F. O’Connell, congressman-elect, Boston; Mr. D. H. Tierney, Waterbury,
Conn., and the Hon. Daniel O’Connor, Australia. The following letter was
received from President-General McGowan:

                           1739 N. STREET, N. W., WASHINGTON, D. C.
                                                       January 16, 1907.

  DEAR MR. MURRAY:

  I regret exceedingly that I will not be able to attend the annual
  meeting and dinner on January 24th. My cold does not improve, and
  unless there is a change very soon, I will have to start for a milder
  climate.

  It is a great disappointment to me not to be with you on that day and
  I beg you will express to all the members of the Society my regret at
  my enforced absence and the hope that next year I may be more
  fortunate.

  My attack of “grippe,” which started the middle of last month, has
  left me with a most provoking cough, and I do not get my strength
  back. With kind regards, believe me,

                                               Sincerely yours,
                                                           JOHN MCGOWAN.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Music was furnished during the banquet by a fine orchestra. Following
was the dinner:

                                 MENU.

                              Cape Oysters
                     Bisque of Lobster Aux Souffles
                          Consomme Printaniere
                     Paupiette Halibut Au Vin Blanc
                           Potato Croquettes
                     Filet of Beef, Fresh Mushrooms
                Delmonico Potatoes      Stringless Beans
                      Sweetbread Cutlets with Peas
                           Punch a la Romaine
                          Roast Red Head Duck
                            Chiffonade Salad
                          Fancy Assorted Cake
                          Neapolitan Ice Cream
                           Fruit      Cheese
                              Small Coffee

In addition to those already mentioned as present at the dinner, after
the business meeting, there were the Hon. Patrick T. Barry, Chicago,
Ill.; the Hon. Thomas Z. Lee, Providence, R. I.; Mr. John Morgan, New
York City; the Rev. Father Lyons, Boston, Mass.; Mr. R. J. Donahue,
Ogdensburg, N. Y.; Mr. Edmund Reardon, Cambridge, Mass.; Col. James
Moran, Providence, R. I.; Dr. M. F. Sullivan, Lawrence, Mass.; Mr.
Bernard J. Joyce, Boston, Mass.; Mr. T. H. Murray, secretary-general of
the Society; Mr. John D. Rohan, New York City; Mr. John T. F.
MacDonnell, Holyoke, Mass.; Mr. P. F. Magrath, Binghamton, N. Y.; Mr. M.
J. Jordan, Boston, Mass.; Mr. M. H. Cox, Boston, Mass.; Mr. William J.
Kelly, Portsmouth, N. H.; Mr. P. A. O’Connell, Boston, Mass.; Mr.
Bernard McCaughey, Pawtucket, R. I.; Mr. W. F. Kenny, Boston, Mass.; Mr.
D. P. Downing, Cambridge, Mass.; Mr. James H. Devlin, Boston, Mass.; Mr.
John J. Sullivan, Boston, Mass.; Capt. D. J. Gorman, Boston, Mass.; Mr.
A. B. Sutherland (guest of Dr. M. F. Sullivan), Lawrence, Mass., and
other gentlemen.

The after-dinner speeches were along the Society’s line of work and were
of a most interesting nature. In his opening remarks, Mr. Fitzpatrick
told of the early efforts of the Irish in Boston, and how their labors
were an inspiration to the men and women of today.

The Hon. Charles E. Gorman of Providence, R. I., followed the
toastmaster with a story on the bravery and chivalry of the Irish race.
The early conditions in New England, and Rhode Island in particular,
were outlined, after which he spoke on the struggles of the Irish to get
a footing and show their spirit. He paid a stirring tribute to the work
accomplished by the Celts and the Teutons and how their spirit of
liberty managed to overcome difficulties.

The Hon. P. T. Barry of Chicago was well received when he arose to speak
on the part the Irish took in the development of Chicago, the West and
the great Northwest. His historical data was particularly interesting
from the time of Chevalier McCarthy’s advent to the present.
Congressman-elect Joseph F. O’Connell of Boston spoke on “The Part
Played by the Irish in the Early History of Our Country.”

Mr. A. B. Sutherland of Lawrence, Mass., who is of Scottish blood,
delivered an interesting speech, in which he told of what Irish
civilization had done for Scotland and all northern Europe, and
particularly of the spirit of liberty given to the Scotch by Irish
example.

Rev. John J. Lyons illustrated how the Irish had done magnificent work
in the interest of the church, and he made an earnest appeal for
friendship on all sides and good will to mankind in general.

The Hon. Daniel O’Connor of Australia electrified the gathering with his
witty remarks, and his narrative of the Irish influence in British
literature and jurisprudence was unusually interesting.

Mr. D. H. Tierney of Waterbury, Conn., spoke for a few minutes on the
Irish in Rochambeau’s army, after which the Hon. Joseph H. O’Neil and
Michael J. Jordan, both of Boston, addressed the gathering briefly.

Before the meeting adjourned the Society paid a tribute to President
Roosevelt, who is an active member of the organization. The tribute took
the form of the following preamble and resolution:


       PREAMBLE AND RESOLUTION OF THANKS AND APPRECIATION FROM THE
                    AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.

  At the annual meeting of the American-Irish Historical Society, held
  in Boston, Mass., on the evening of January 24, 1907, the following
  minute was unanimously adopted:

  WHEREAS, The American-Irish Historical Society has learned of the
  excellent work of our distinguished fellow-member, the Hon. Theodore
  Roosevelt, as embodied in his article on “The Ancient Irish Sagas,”
  recently published, and believing that some appropriate action should
  be taken to show our appreciation of the study and research exhibited
  in the able contribution mentioned, it is

  _Resolved_, therefore, that in the opinion of this Society a splendid
  example is set by President Roosevelt in finding the time and
  opportunity, in the midst of his many duties and responsibilities, to
  devote attention to a subject dear to us. We heartily congratulate him
  upon the results he has so ably exemplified and set forth as the
  outcome of his researches into early Irish history.[1]

Footnote 1:

  A copy of the foregoing preamble and resolution was forwarded to
  President Roosevelt and the Society received a cordial reply.


                    EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS RECEIVED.

The following are extracts from letters of regret:

From Mr. John J. Rooney, New York City: “My Dear Mr. Murray: I am
exceedingly sorry I cannot be present at the American-Irish Historical
Society dinner tomorrow night. I have a heavy case in court and cannot
get away. Kindly express my regrets to all. Sincerely, John J. Rooney.”

From the Hon. Felix Carbray, M. R. I. A., Quebec, Canada: “I duly
received the notice for the annual meeting and dinner. I deeply regret
that distance and heavy business cares will make it unable for me to be
present. I hope you will have a large gathering and a successful
celebration.”

From the Hon. Patrick J. McCarthy, mayor of Providence, R. I.: “Dear
Sir: Your letter in regard to the dinner of the American-Irish
Historical Society received, and I regret to state that owing to
previous engagements in Providence it will be impossible for me to
attend. Wishing you a successful meeting, I remain, respectfully yours,
Patrick J. McCarthy.”

From the Hon. Patrick J. Ryan, mayor of Elizabeth, N. J.: “Many thanks
for your circular letter announcing that the American-Irish Historical
Society is to have a reception and dinner in Boston on Thursday, January
24, next. I appreciate the notice I assure you, and regret to say that I
will not be able to attend owing to a press of other matters here. I
hope and trust the meeting will be a success in every way.”

From the Hon. Franklin M. Danaher, Albany, N. Y.: “Dear Mr. Murray: I
have your notice of the annual meeting and dinner of the American-Irish
Historical Society in Boston on Thursday, January 24, 1907. I have
always been able to attend the annual meetings of the Society because
they happened in New York coincident with my presence there on official
business. Whether I can be in Boston on January 24th is somewhat
problematical, but I will do so if I can. Do you expect
President-General McGowan?”

From Mr. Edward J. McGuire, New York City: “My Dear Mr. Murray: It seems
ungracious not to attend the Historical Society’s dinner at Boston on
Thursday evening, you Yankees have been so generous and loyal in coming
to New York, but for me it is absolutely impossible to be present. I am
engaged in a number of most important and engrossing professional
matters, and I have in addition but recently returned from a week’s
absence in the South. I am sure you will make my excuses. I hope that
you are entirely recovered from your illness and that everything
prospers with you and the Society. With kindest regards, Very truly
yours, Edward J. McGuire.”

From the Rt. Rev. Mgr. Dennis J. O’Connell, M. A., S. T. D., rector of
the Catholic University of America, Washington, D. C.: “Mr. T. H.
Murray, Secretary-General, Sea View, Mass. My Dear Sir: I desire to
thank you very cordially for the notice you sent me regarding the annual
dinner, and to say at the same time with sincere regret that I am afraid
I cannot assist, for the following day, January the 25th, is the feast
of our Faculty of Theology at which I must be present. Wishing all a
pleasant time, I remain, Very sincerely yours, D. J. O’Connell.”

From the Hon. Edward A. Moseley, Washington, D. C.: “I regret very much
that it is impossible for me to attend the annual meeting of the
American-Irish Historical Society. I really wish that the Society would
have its next meeting in Washington; I believe it would be a good plan
from every point of view. I had fully intended to get to the coming
meeting on the 24th, but I went to Boston over the holidays, and the
result is that I have as bad a cold as I ever had in my life, and I am
afraid to leave Washington. Do have the next annual meeting in
Washington, and I will contribute in every way to make it a success, and
will devote myself to the work. With all cordial regards, sincerely
yours, E. A. Moseley.”




                     =HISTORICAL NOTES AND PAPERS.=




                 IRISH ABILITY IN THE UNITED STATES.[2]


             BY JAMES JEFFREY ROCHE, LL. D., BOSTON, MASS.

Footnote 2:

  This paper appeared originally in the Boston _Pilot_.

The Irish race, both here and in the old world, has suffered so much in
the way of misrepresentation at the hands of English and pro-English
writers, its merits have been so minimized and its defects so magnified,
that it is almost a hopeless task to attempt the refutation of even a
tithe of the falsehoods.

It is only when a writer offers an easily accessible authority for his
statements that the general reader can take the time and trouble, if so
disposed, to investigate the reference and verify the accuracy or
honesty of the author who professes to have quoted truly.

Mr. Henry Cabot Lodge has written, and the _Century Magazine_ has
published an article on “The Distribution of Ability in the United
States,” in which he exalts the English race at the expense of some
others, and depreciates the Irish race, with or without malice prepense,
in a manner which is, to say the least, remarkable.

Mr. Lodge deals in some general statements easily susceptible of
disproof, as when he says that “there was virtually no Irish immigration
during the colonial period, and indeed none of consequence until the
present century was well advanced.”

He offers no authority for this absurd statement; so it may be assumed
that he ignorantly believes it true. Perhaps he also honestly believes
in the race called “Scotch-Irish,” whom he defines as “descendants of
the Scotch _and English_ who settled in the North of Ireland.” Let these
things pass. We are concerned only with the accuracy and honesty of Mr.
Lodge’s quotations when he refers to a specific authority for facts and
figures and professes to be governed by that authority.

In order to classify the distribution of “ability,” Mr. Lodge says that
he “took _Appleton’s Encyclopedia of American Biography_ in six volumes,
one of the largest and most recent works upon the subject, and
classified the persons mentioned therein who were citizens of the United
States according to occupation, birthplace and race extraction.”

Mr. Lodge says that he found the work large and laborious. We can
confirm that statement; for we also have taken the six volumes of
_Appleton’s_ and have gone conscientiously through the 14,000 and odd
names therein recorded, to see if that otherwise valuable publication
had really given the Irish race such an astonishingly poor record as Mr.
Lodge’s tables show. We find that it has not. We find that Mr. Lodge and
his authority differ so astoundingly, on almost every point, that his
deductions are absolutely worthless because his statements are so
utterly untrue.

In the matter of quantity, _Appleton’s_ gives to the Irish race a list
nearly one hundred per cent greater than Mr. Lodge professes to have
found in its pages. On the score of quality, taking Mr. Lodge’s own test
of merit, _Appleton’s_ gives about 300 per cent more to the race than
Mr. Lodge accords it.

Mr. Lodge classifies race by the paternal side alone, which is probably
fair enough for practical purposes, and says:

“In a large number of cases, especially where the extraction is not
English, the race stock is given in the dictionary. In a still larger
number of instances the name and the place of birth furnish unmistakable
evidence as to race. That error should be avoided in this classification
is not to be expected, but I am perfectly satisfied that the race
distribution is in the main correct. Such errors as exist tend, I think,
here as elsewhere in these statistics, to balance one another, and the
net result is, I believe, so substantially accurate as to have very real
value, and to throw a great deal of light on what we owe in the way of
ability to each of the various races who settled the United States.”

He counts as original settlers all who came to this country before the
date of the adoption of the Constitution, A. D. 1789; those who came
after that date are classified as “immigrants.” Taking the
_Encyclopedia_ as his authority, he examines the birth or race
extraction of 14,243 persons therein named as having achieved sufficient
distinction to deserve mention. As a result he finds that over 10,000 of
the number should be credited to the “English” race.

It is not worth while to inquire into the accuracy of that estimate,
since Mr. Lodge’s treatment of another race sufficiently disproves his
claims to accuracy on any score.

In Tables “D” and “H,” covering respectively the original settlers and
the immigrants, he gives the number of men of the Irish race who have
achieved the distinction of a place in _Appleton’s_. Nowhere,
apparently, is any allowance made either for the distinguished
descendants of the original Irish settlers, distinguished or obscure
themselves, nor for the distinguished children of undistinguished
immigrants since 1789.

Charles Carroll of Carrollton is, we suppose, credited to the Irish of
pre-Constitution days, and Thomas Addis Emmet to the “immigrant” class,
but where does Mr. Lodge place the distinguished descendants of both?
Where does he place the distinguished sons of obscure fathers, such men
as Andrew Jackson and Robert Fulton? Certainly not among the race to
which, according to _Appleton_, they belong, for they have no
recognition in his “double star” table, to be described hereafter. Do
they go to swell the ranks of the 10,000 English or those of the mixed
and mythical “Scotch-Irish”?

What does he do with Philip Sheridan, who being neither an “immigrant”
nor descended from pre-Constitution ancestors, is in a worse case than
his namesake, Philip Nolan, being a “man without a race?” We cannot
believe that Mr. Lodge ever intended committing such a palpable
absurdity, because if carried to its logical conclusion, it would apply
equally to distinguished men of all races. Mr. Lodge himself, for all
that _Appleton’s_ tells us to the contrary, never had a pre-Constitution
ancestor, and has, therefore, no right to class himself among the 10,000
“English,” as he presumably does.

Mr. Lodge has a delightfully simple method of determining the relative
values of great men. It is by noting how much of pictorial glory is
awarded to each in the _Encyclopedia_. Persons whose biographical
sketches are not illustrated with a portrait are not counted in at all.

Those who have a vignette portrait are classified as “single stars.” The
truly great, who have full-page portraits, are called “double stars”—of
these there are 58 among the whole 14,243.

Mr. Lodge confesses that encyclopediac fame is hardly just in giving
double star honors to William Gilmore Simms and shutting out Hawthorne,
Poe and Lowell, but Fame is notoriously capricious of her favors; which
is why, perhaps, such authors as John Hay, T. W. Parsons, Theodore
Roosevelt and many others are sent pictureless to posterity, while Mrs.
E. D. E. N. Southworth and Mrs. Ann S. Stephens are immortalized in
becoming wood-cuts. Mr. Lodge himself shines as a “single-star,” as does
also Mr. E. P. Roe.

But even in his stellar classification Mr. Lodge makes a singular
mistake, again on the wrong side of the Irish account. His “totals by
race extraction” allow only one double star to “Irish.” Yet his
cyclopedic authority has full-page steel engravings of the following
six, all credited to the Irish race, without any hint of a mythical
Scotch mixture: Chester A. Arthur, son of Rev. William Arthur of Antrim;
John C. Calhoun, son of Patrick and grandson of James of Donegal; Robert
Fulton, son of a Kilkenny man; Andrew Jackson, son of Andrew of
Carrickfergus; James K. Polk, descendant of Irish Polk or “Pollock”;
Philip H. Sheridan, race not mentioned but pretty well known.

Mr. Lodge is equally reckless of fact when he attempts to count the
“single stars” of the Irish race. He finds only thirteen of these among
the early settler class and eleven among the “immigrants”—twenty-four in
all. Here are the names of sixty-five, given by _Appleton’s_, and not
including such men of the Irish race as Lawrence Barrett, Lawrence and
Philip Kearny, J. A. MacGahan, Commodore Macdonough and others, whose
race is not specified in the cyclopedia:

 Francis Barber
 John Barry
 Jas. G. Birney
 Johnston Blakeley
 Wm. O. Butler
 Henry C. Carey
 Charles Carroll of Carrollton
 John Carroll
 Thomas Conway
 Michael Corcoran
 Michael A. Corrigan
 David Crockett
 Andrew G. Curtin
 Charles P. Daly
 Thomas Addis Emmet
 James Gibbons
 Edward Hand
 Jas. Hillhouse
 John H. Hopkins
 John Hughes
 John Ireland
 Thomas Jones
 F. P. Kenrick
 John B. Kerfoot
 John A. Logan
 John J. Lynch
 John McCloskey
 Edward McGlynn
 Jas. McHenry
 Thomas McKean
 Alex. Macomb
 George G. Meade
 Richard Montgomery
 Alfred Moore
 John Nixon
 Fitz-James O’Brien
 Michael O’Connor
 Charles O’Conor
 P. H. O’Rorke
 Robert Patterson
 Leonidas Polk
 Andrew Porter
 Tyrone Power
 Wm. C. Preston
 Wm. D. Preston
 John Roach
 Stephen C. Rowan
 John Rutledge
 Patrick J. Ryan
 Jas. Shields
 Jas. Smith
 Samuel S. Smith
 Charles F. Smith
 Charles Stewart
 John Sullivan
 Jas. Sullivan
 George Taylor
 Hugh N. Thompson
 Launt Thompson
 Richard V. Whelan
 George W. Whistler
 J. A. MacN. Whistler
 Wm. P. Whyte
 Richard H. Wilde
 Henry Wilson

Following is Mr. Lodge’s tabulated misrepresentation of Irish ability
according to his Tables “D” and “H,” but not according to the facts as
given by _Appleton’s_:

                                Before 1789. After 1789. Total.
         Statesmen                         9          13     22
         Soldiers                         18          19     37
         Clergy                           28          85    113
         Lawyers                          12           6     18
         Physicians                        2           2      4
         Literature                       17          22     39
         Art                               7          12     19
         Science                           3           6      9
         Educators                         0           7      7
         Navy                              4           4      8
         Business                          3           8     11
         Philanthropy                      4           4      8
         Pioneers and Explorers            0           3      3
         Inventors                         0           0      0
         Engineers                         2           1      3
         Architects                        0           0      0
         Musicians                         0           1      1
         Actors                            0           7      7
                                         ———         ———    ———
                 Total                   109         200    309

Under the first head, “Statesmen,” Mr. Lodge “includes not only persons
who have held public office, but all who as reformers, agitators, or in
any other capacity have distinguished themselves in public affairs.” He
allows nine statesmen to the Irish in his first list. His authority,
_Appleton’s Encyclopedia_, is more liberal, giving them no less than
thirty, including seven signers of the Declaration of Independence.

Not to answer assertion with mere counter-assertion, we have compiled
the following list, from _Appleton’s_, including only such names as are
specifically stated to belong to the Irish race, omitting all that are
claimed as “Scotch-Irish,” and not even counting men of known Irish
origin who are not so described in the cyclopedia.

In so doing we purposely leave out scores of Kellys, Butlers, Moores,
Barrys, Boyles, etc. We do not wish to claim anything beyond the strict
letter of Mr. Lodge’s authority, _Appleton’s Encyclopedia_. For every
name in the following lists given by _Appleton’s_ as Irish, but possibly
of remoter Scotch or English origin, there will be found half a dozen
other names in _Appleton’s_ of obvious Celtic Irish origin which are not
here included because not so specified in the cyclopedia. We are taking
Mr. Lodge’s authority as such, in order to show how wildly he has
departed from it. Following is the correct list compiled from
_Appleton’s_:


                               STATESMEN.

 Chester A. Arthur
 Robert W. Barnwell
 John S. Barry
 James G. Birney
 David C. Broderick
 Thomas Burke
 Pierce Butler
 John C. Calhoun
 Daniel Carroll
 John Lee Carroll
 Charles Carroll of Carrollton
 Eugene Casserly
 P. A. Collins
 John Conness
 Andrew G. Curtin
 Michael Farley
 William Findley
 Thos. Fitzgerald
 Benj. Fitzpatrick
 Thos. Fitzsimmons
 Andrew Gregg
 Joseph Haslett
 Alex. Henry
 John Hogan
 Andrew Jackson
 Charles W. Jones
 Edward Kavanagh
 Thomas Lewis
 C. Lyon
 Matthew Lyon
 Chris. Marshall
 Alex. Mebane
 Jas. McHenry
 Thos. McKean
 John McKinley
 John Montgomery
 T. P. Moore
 John Murphy
 Jas. K. Polk
 Thomas Polk
 William Polk
 David R. Porter
 Geo. B. Porter
 Francis Preston
 Jas. P. Preston
 Wm. B. Preston
 Wm. C. Preston
 George Read
 John M. Read
 John Reynolds
 Edward Rutledge
 John Rutledge
 William J. Sewell
 James Smith
 Robert Smith
 Samuel W. Smith
 John Smilie
 George Sullivan
 James Sullivan
 George Taylor
 Charles Thomson
 Matt. Thornton
 Michael Walsh
 R. H. Whitely
 William P. Whyte
 Henry Wilson


                               SOLDIERS.

 T. P. Andrews
 Henry B. Armstrong
 John Armstrong
 John Armstrong
 Thomas J. Baird
 Francis Barber
 Robert Barnwell
 David B. Birney
 Fitzhugh Birney
 James G. Birney
 Andrew Brown
 Edw. Butler
 Edw. G. W. Butler
 Percival Butler
 Richard Butler
 Thomas Butler
 Thomas L. Butler
 William Butler
 William O. Butler
 Patrick R. Cleburne
 Patrick E. Connor
 Thomas Conway
 Michael Corcoran
 Robert T. Emmet
 John I. Gregg
 David M. Gregg
 Edward Hand
 John Haslett
 Armstrong Irvine
 Callender Irvine
 James Irvine
 William Irvine
 William N. Irvine
 Andrew Irwin
 Matthew Irwin
 R. H. Jackson
 Peter Keenan
 John C. Kelton
 Andrew Lewis
 Charles Lewis
 John L. Lewis
 William Lewis
 John A. Logan
 Alex. Macombe
 Maurice Maloney
 Hugh Maxwell
 Thompson Maxwell
 George McClure
 John E. McMahon
 Jas. P. McMahon
 Martin T. McMahon
 Stephen J. McGroarty
 G. J. G. McRee
 George Meade
 George G. Meade
 Thomas Francis Meagher
 John Mease
 Robert H. G. Minty
 “Captain Molly”
 Richard Montgomery
 James Moore
 James Morrison
 Stephen Moylan
 James A. Mulligan
 Francis Nichols
 Lewis Nichola
 William Nichols
 William A. Nichols
 John Nixon
 John O’Neill
 John P. J. O’Brien
 Patrick H. O’Rorke
 Robert Patterson
 F. A. Patterson
 Robert Patton
 Leonidas Polk
 Lucius E. Polk
 Andrew Porter
 Horace Porter
 Andrew Porter
 James Potter
 John S. Preston
 William Preston
 Thomas Proctor
 Griffith Rutherford
 Philip H. Sheridan
 James Shields
 Charles F. Smith
 John S. Smith
 Samuel Smith
 Thomas A. Smyth
 John Stark
 William Stark
 John Sullivan
 Jere. C. Sullivan
 Peter J. Sullivan
 Thomas W. Sweeny
 William Thompson
 William Thompson
 W. T. W. Tone
 Hugh Waddell
 John Whistler
 William Whistler
 J. W. G. Whistler
 Thomas L. Young


                           CLERGY (CATHOLIC).

 John Barry
 D. Bradley
 George P. Brophy
 M. F. Burke
 John Q. Burke
 Andrew Byrne
 John Carroll
 L. Concanen
 John Connelly
 John J. Conroy
 Henry C. Conwell
 J. A. Corcoran
 Michael A. Corrigan
 Patrick F. Dealy
 T. J. Ducey
 James Dugan
 John Early
 Michael Egan
 John Elder
 William H. Elder
 John England
 Thomas Farrell
 James Fitton
 Edward Fitzgerald
 John B. Fitzpatrick
 Thomas Foley
 Thomas Galberry
 Hugh P. Gallagher
 James Gibbons
 M. Harkins
 Thomas F. Hendricken
 John Hennessey
 John J. Hennessey
 John J. Hogan
 John Hughes
 John Ireland
 John J. Keane
 Patrick Kelley
 F. P. Kenrick
 P. R. Kenrick
 James Keough
 John Loughlin
 P. A. Ludden
 John J. Lynch
 P. W. Lynch
 P. Manogue
 John McCloskey
 John McCloskey
 W. G. McCloskey
 John McElroy
 Edward McGlynn
 John McMullen
 F. McNeirney
 John Moore
 J. J. Moriarty
 P. E. Moriarty
 B. J. McQuade
 T. Mullen
 William Neligan
 E. O’Connell
 J. J. O’Connell
 John F. X. O’Connor
 J. O’Connor
 Michael O’Connor
 M. J. O’Farrell
 J. M. O’Gorman
 William O’Hara
 A. O’Reagan
 B. O’Reilly
 B. O’Reilly
 James O’Reilly
 John O’Reilly
 P. T. O’Reilly
 R. Phelan
 J. B. Purcell
 William Quarter
 John Quinlan
 William Quinn
 Patrick W. Riordan
 M. Ronayne
 James Ryan
 P. J. Ryan
 L. Scanlan
 R. Scannell
 Clement Smyth
 William Starrs
 John Twigg
 James Whelan
 Peter Whelan
 R. V. Whelan


                          CLERGY (PROTESTANT).

 William Arthur
 John Brown
 William Butler
 Thomas Campbell
 George K. Dunlop
 John Glendy
 A. C. Garrett
 James Gray
 T. C. Henry
 J. H. Hopkins
 John H. Hopkins
 H. H. Kavanagh
 Hugh Knox
 James Latta
 E. D. MacMaster
 John Macnamara
 John W. Mafitt
 J. S. Maginnis
 A. McCaine
 A. P. McFerrin
 John B. McFerrin
 James McFerrin
 G. McMaster
 Edward Mitchell
 D. Moore
 T. Murphy
 J. Murray
 N. Murray
 John D. Ogilby
 Fred Ogilby
 J. O’Kelly
 R. Patterson
 W. Patton
 W. W. Patton
 S. Ralston
 William S. Rainsford
 S. Robinson
 E. Rutledge
 F. H. Rutledge
 John Scarborough
 John B. Smith
 R. Smith
 S. S. Smith
 T. Smyth
 Samuel Taggart
 Hugh M. Thompson
 Thomas R. Sullivan
 James Waddell
 Moses Waddell
 S. B. Wylie


                                LAWYERS.

 G. B. Adrian
 W. T. S. Barry
 William Birnley
 George Bryan
 Aldanno Burke
 Edmund Burke
 John J. Burke
 Richard Busteed
 Pierce Butler
 James Campbell
 Charles P. Daley
 Edmund S. Dargan
 Daniel Dougherty
 Thomas A. Emmet
 Robert Emmet
 Thomas Addis Emmet
 James Hillhouse
 James A. Hillhouse
 William Hillhouse
 Samuel Hood
 William L. Houston
 Thomas Irwin
 David S. Jones
 P. H. Jones
 Thomas Jones
 Samuel Jones
 Samuel W. Jones
 William Killen
 Joshua Lewis
 O. A. Lochnane
 William Logan
 John V. Macmahon
 G. J. McRee
 Alfred Moore
 Alfred Moore
 Maurice Moore
 Charles O’Conor
 John B. O’Neall
 William Paterson
 Robert Patterson
 Thomas G. Polk
 William H. Polk
 J. M. Porter
 W. A. Porter
 Isaac T. Preston
 William Preston
 John Read
 John M. Read
 Hugh Rutledge
 E. G. Ryan
 George Shea
 Alex. Smyth
 William Stark
 A. C. Sullivan
 Jere. Sullivan
 John T. S. Sullivan
 A. M. Waddell
 Hugh Waddell
 Thomas Wilson


                              PHYSICIANS.

 John Bell
 Charles Caldwell
 William H. Dudley
 Thomas A. Emmet
 Fred V. Hopkins
 Matthew Irvine
 Cornelius A. Logan
 James H. McClelland
 James McHenry
 William J. McNevin
 John Osborn
 John C. Osborn
 Robert M. Patterson
 William M. Polk
 Andrew W. Smyth
 John Watson


                              LITERATURE.

 John Binns
 Joseph Brennan
 John Ross Browne
 John D. Burk
 Henry C. Cary
 William Cassidy
 Henry Hamilton Cox
 F. Marion Crawford
 Jere. Curtin
 Eleanor C. Donnelly
 Ignatius Donnelly
 M. F. Egan
 Kate Field
 Matthew Field
 William D. Gallagher
 Henry Giles
 Francis Glass
 E. L. Godkin
 William Grimshaw
 Louise I. Guiney
 Charles G. Halpine
 Moses Harvey
 Hugh J. Hastings
 James A. Hillhouse
 Aug. L. Hillhouse
 Caspar T. Hopkins
 William A. Jones
 Robert D. Joyce
 Henry F. Keenan
 Thomas Kinsella
 Celia Logan
 Cornelius A. Logan
 James A. MacMaster
 Henry N. Martin
 Edward Maturin
 Justin McCarthy
 R. Shelton McKenzie
 John O’Kane Murray
 Fitz-James O’Brien
 E. O. B. O’Callaghan
 Thomas O’Connor
 William D. O’Connor
 Daniel K. O’Donnell
 Theodore O’Hara
 Henry O’Reilly
 John Boyle O’Reilly
 John Osborne
 John Reade
 Mayne Reid
 William E. Robinson
 James Jeffrey Roche
 Abram J. Ryan
 Mary A. Sadlier
 William Sampson
 John Savage
 Charles D. Shanly
 John A. Shea
 John D. G. Shea
 Richard Smith
 Caleb Stark
 William Stuart
 Margaret A. F. Sullivan
 William Sullivan
 Louis F. Tasistro
 Robert Walsh
 William S. Walsh
 D. P. Warden
 Robert Watts
 R. H. Wilde
 William Wright


                                  ART.

 D. M. Carter
 Thomas Crawford
 P. P. Duggan
 Rosina Emmet
 W. M. Fisher
 Aug. Saint Gaudens
 Louis Saint Gaudens
 James Hamilton
 W. J. Hennessey
 Thomas Hovenden
 Charles C. Ingham
 J. E. Kelly
 William McGrath
 Joseph Milmore
 Martin Milmore
 John F. Murphy
 Hugh Newell
 William A. O’Donovan
 Launt Thompson


                                SCIENCE.

 Robert Adrain
 John Cassin
 John P. Emmet
 G. Macloskie
 J. W. Mallett
 Charles Marshall
 T. O. C. Sloane
 M. Twomey
 Daniel Vaughn


                               EDUCATORS.

 William Byrne
 William H. Maxwell
 Robert Milligan
 Patrick F. Mullany
 M. A. Newell
 Cornelius M. O’Leary
 Robert B. Patton
 James Ryder
 Richard Sterling
 Robert E. Thompson
 Michael Walsh
 James Waddell
 John Waddell
 Theo. A. Wilson


                                 NAVY.

 John Barry
 Johnston Blakely
 John Cassin
 Stephen Cassin
 Thomas A. Dornin
 Henry Eagle
 William H. Macomb
 John M. Maffit
 Richard W. Meade
 Matthew Mease
 Richard W. Meade
 Jeremiah O’Brien
 John O’Brien
 Richard O’Brien
 William O’Brien
 George C. Read
 Thomas Read
 Stephen C. Rowan
 James I. Waddell


                               BUSINESS.

 Patrick Barry
 Alex. Brown
 George Brown
 John A. Brown
 James Brown
 William Brown
 John Burnside
 Mathew Carey
 Mathew Carey
 John Dunlop
 James G. Fair
 James C. Flood
 Hugh Gaine
 Alex. Henry
 E. A. Hopkins
 John D. Jones
 W. R. Jones
 George P. Kane
 Alex. Macomb
 B. MacMahon
 George Meade
 R. W. Meade
 J. McHenry
 James Murphy
 J. M. Nesbitt
 William Niblo
 Hugh O’Brien
 William S. O’Brien
 M. Phelan
 Oliver Pollock
 John Roach
 T. L. Rutledge
 T. L. Preston
 Samuel Sloan
 Luke Tiernan


                            PHILANTHROPISTS.

 W. W. Corcoran
 John C. Drumgoole
 Sister Euphemia
 Margaret Haughery
 Sister Mary A. Horan
 Robert Kelley
 William Kelley
 Sr. S. Teresa Lalor
 Mary McHenry
 Robert McKim
 John G. Shortall
 George H. Stuart


                               PIONEERS.

 Patrick Breen
 David Crockett
 Simon Kenton
 Benj. Logan
 Robert Strawbridge


                               INVENTORS.

 Paul Boyton
 Robert M. Dalzell
 Robert Fulton


                               ENGINEERS.

 Thomas A. Emmet
 John L. Sullivan
 George W. Whistler
 George W. Whistler


                               MUSICIANS.

 P. S. Gilmore
 Charles J. Hopkins


                              ARCHITECTS.

 [3]None

Footnote 3:

  Many eminent architects are, of course, to be credited to men of Irish
  blood in this country, but it must be remembered that we are now
  dealing solely with a certain edition of a certain encyclopedia.


                                ACTORS.

 Lawrence Barrett
 Dion Boucicault
 John Brougham
 John Drew
 John Duff
 John H. Dwyer
 Joseph M. Field
 William J. Florence
 John Henry
 Matilda Heron
 Eliza Logan
 Olive Logan
 William C. Macready
 John E. McCullough
 Tyrone Power
 Ada Rehan
 John T. Raymond
 Barney Williams

Mr. Lodge is right, _i. e._, he follows his authority honestly in giving
practically the correct number of names belonging to the departments of
Art, Science and Architecture, and these alone.

It is worth noting that, if the Irish are conspicuous by their absence
from the last named, they are gloriously prominent in the first. The
race which has given to America, Crawford, Milmore, Kelly, St. Gaudens,
Thompson, Hennessey, O’Donovan and as many more, has contributed at
least its share to the glory of the country in that department.

The corrected figures, not according to Mr. Lodge, but according to the
authority from which Mr. Lodge professed to have taken his own are,
therefore, as follows. We give first the summary of the Lodge tables and
then that of _Appleton’s_ cyclopedia. They speak for themselves:

                        According to Mr. Lodge. According to his authority.
 Statesmen                                   22                          67
 Soldiers                                    37                         107
 Clergy                                     113                         140
 Lawyers                                     18                          59
 Physicians                                   4                          16
 Literature                                  39                          70
 Art                                         19                          19
 Science                                      9                           9
 Educators                                    7                          14
 Navy                                         8                          19
 Business                                    11                          35
 Philanthropy                                 8                          12
 Pioneers and Explorers                       3                           5
 Inventors                                    0                           3
 Engineers                                    3                           4
 Architects                                   0                           0
 Musicians                                    1                           2
 Actors                                       7                          18
                                            ———                         ———
                                            309                         599

The true figures are almost twice as large as those of Mr. Lodge, and
are far from representing the great total of Irish ability contributed
to the United States, but not acknowledged in the cyclopedia.

Mr. Lodge must plead guilty to one of two charges. Either he has
deliberately misrepresented the facts, or he is so careless or
incompetent that he can neither count nor quote within 50 per cent of
the truth.




                EMIGRATION FROM NEW ENGLAND TO IRELAND.


        From Prendergast’s _Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland_.

Prendergast’s _Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland_ says: “Ireland was now
like an empty hive, prepared to receive its new swarm. One of the
earliest efforts of the government towards replanting the parts reserved
to themselves was to turn towards the lately expatriated English in
America. In the early part of the year 1651, when the country, by their
own description to the Council of State, was a scene of unparalleled
waste and ruin, the Commissioners for Ireland affectionately urged Mr.
Harrison, then a minister of the Gospel in New England, to come over to
Ireland, which he would find experimentally was a comfortable seed plot
(so they said) for his labours.

“On his return to New England, it was hoped he might encourage those
whose hearts the Lord should stir up to look back again towards their
native country, to return and plant in Ireland. There they should have
freedom of worship, and the (mundane) advantages of convenient lands,
fit for husbandry, in healthful air, near to maritime towns or secure
places, with such encouragement from the state as should demonstrate
that it was their chief care to plant Ireland with a godly seed and
generation.

“Mr. Harrison was unable to come; but some movement appears to have been
made towards a plantation from America, as proposals were received in
January, 1655, for the planting of the town of Sligo and lands
thereabouts, with families from New England; and lands on the Mile line,
together with the two little islands called Oyster Island and Coney
Island (containing 200 acres), were leased for one year, from 10th of
April, 1655, for the use of such English families as should come from
New England in America, in order to their transplantation.

“In 1656 several families, arriving from New England at Limerick, had
the excise of tobacco brought with them for the use of themselves and
families remitted; and other families in May and July of that year, who
had come over from New England to plant, were received as tenants of
state lands near Garristown, in the county of Dublin, about fifteen
miles north of the capital.”




             STEPHEN JACKSON, A PROVIDENCE, R. I., SETTLER.


  From a Publication of the Rhode Island Historical Society, October,
                                 1894.

Stephen Jackson of Providence, R. I., was born in 1700, in Kilkenny,
Ireland. He came to America, it is said, in 1724, to escape political
persecution. He married, 1725, August 15, Anne Boone, daughter of Samuel
and Mary Boone, of North Kingstown, R. I. He hired land in Providence in
1745, and at this period is called “schoolmaster.” He bought and sold
several parcels of land subsequently. In 1762, he and his son, Samuel,
bought of Stephen Hopkins, land on the new street, called Benefit
Street, where they were then living. Stephen Jackson died, 1765, July
22, and was buried in the North burial ground. His wife, Anne, was born,
1709, September 18. She died at Pomfret, Conn., 1782, January 30.

Stephen and Anne (Boone) Jackson had children as follows:

  1. George, b. 1727; m. Lydia Harris, daughter of Toleration and Sarah
          (Foster) Harris. He died 1769, March 1. His will mentions wife
          Lydia, daughter Lydia and son Joseph. He was a “noted
          commander.”

  2. Samuel, b. 1729; d. 1811, Sept. 6.

  3. David, b.     ; m. Deborah Field, 1751, Oct. 9.

  4. Richard, b. 1731, May 10; m. Susan Waterman, 1760, Dec. 31,
          daughter of Nathan and Phebe (Smith) Waterman. He died 1818,
          Dec. 29. His seven children’s births are upon record. His son,
          Nathan W., was many years town clerk; Stephen was cashier of
          Exchange Bank; and Richard was President of Washington
          Insurance Company. (Richard, Jr.’s son Charles was Governor of
          Rhode Island.)

  5. Anne, b. 1736, May 12; d. 1753, Nov. 20.

  6. Judith, b. 1738, Nov.; m. Simeon Thayer, 1759, Feb. 7. She died
          1771, April 28.

  7. Mary, b.     ; m. Ezekiel Burr, 1759, Nov. 7, son of David and
          Sarah.

  8. Elizabeth, b. 1743, May 23; m. William Lanksford, 1766, April 21.
          She died 1812, Jan. 27.

  9. Susannah, b.     ; d. 1772, June.

  10. Thomas, b. 1747; m. Mary Brown, 1778, Sept. 14, daughter of
          Richard. He died 1807, March 17. His widow’s will (in 1834)
          mentions son Samuel, grandchildren, etc.

  11. Sally, b. 1753; m. Tilly Merrick Olney, 1772, Feb., daughter of
          Joseph and Elizabeth (Mawney) Olney. She died 1785, Sept.

  12. Nancy, b. 1756, Nov. 8; m. (1) John Angell, 1785, April 3; m. (2)
          Simeon Thayer; m. (3) Darius Daniels. She died 1803, March 9.

The above is not contributed as by any means a complete record, but
simply as suggestive, and to save some stray memoranda, part of them
found in archives of R. I. Historical Society.

Query (A). Is there not a manuscript account of this family in
existence, and if so, where?

Query (B). Was Daniel Jackson, who was born in Boston, but who lived in
Providence, a relative of this family? His record was as follows:

  Daniel Jackson, b. 1742, April 2; m. Roby Hawkins, 1765, Nov. 4. He
          died 1806, May 21. His will mentions children Samuel, John T.
          (father of Daniel, Ephraim and Benjamin M., etc.), Benjamin
          M., Amey (wife of Bernon Dun), Ruth (wife of Lewis Bosworth),
          and Polly.




                  THE AFFAIR AT FORT WILLIAM AND MARY.


                      BY THE REV. THOMAS GREGORY.

Just before sunset on the afternoon of December 13, 1774, Paul Revere
jumped from his foam-covered steed in front of a house in Durham, New
Hampshire, rushed in and informed its owner, Major John Sullivan, that
two regiments of British regulars were about to march from Boston to
occupy Portsmouth and the fort in its harbor. In an instant Sullivan
made up his mind as to what it was his duty to do, and within less than
two hours he had gathered his force and was ready for business.

The party, sixteen in number, boarded an unwieldy, sloop-rigged old
craft and darted off down the river to Portsmouth. It was a clear, cold
moonlight night, and presently the crude masonry of old Fort William and
Mary loomed up in the distance, reminding them of the fact that they
were close on to their quarry. When within a rod or so of the shore
their vessel grounded in the shallow water, and in silence they waded to
land, mounted the fort, surprised the garrison and found themselves
victorious without the loss of a man or even of a drop of blood.

Securing the prisoners, the patriots at once broke into the magazine,
where they found one hundred pounds of powder. The powder, along with
one hundred stand of small arms, was put aboard of their craft and taken
back to Durham, where it was buried under the pulpit of the old
meeting-house in front of Major Sullivan’s house.

Six months later the battle of Bunker Hill came off, and it was this
same powder, captured by Major Sullivan at Fort William and Mary, that
enabled the Americans to kill so many of the British in that historic
encounter. Powder was exceedingly scarce in the patriot army, and
Sullivan, anticipating that such might be the case, filled “old John
Demerett’s ox-cart” with the powder he had buried under Parson Adams’
pulpit and sent it over the sixty-odd miles of rocky road to Boston,
where it was destined to do such good service in the cause of liberty.

It was the news of Sullivan’s capture of Fort William and Mary that
precipitated the Revolution. After such a daring deed Lexington was a
foregone conclusion. In the words of another, “Sullivan was the first
man in active rebellion against the British government, and he drew with
him the province he lived in.” In an address on the history of this part
of New Hampshire, Rev. Quint, of Dover, referring to the attack on the
fort, said: “The daring character of the assault cannot be
over-estimated. It was an organized investment of a royal fortress where
the king’s flag was flying and where the king’s garrison met them with
muskets and artillery. It was four months before Lexington, and
Lexington was resistance to attack, while this was deliberate assault.”




                     DOMINICK LYNCH AND HIS FAMILY.


                     Compiled from Various Sources.

Dominick Lynch was a member of the Friendly Sons of St. Patrick, New
York, as early as 1786; a prominent merchant; was of the firm Lynch &
Stoughton, New York. A biographical sketch of Mr. Lynch was published
some years ago in the _American Catholic Historical Researches_. It was
written by Richard H. Clarke, LL. D., and treated the subject at great
length. According to Dr. Clarke, Mr. Lynch was born in Galway, Ireland,
in 1754.

He married his cousin, Jane Lynch, a native of Dublin. Shortly after,
Dominick and his wife went to reside at Bruges, in Flanders, where he
established a commercial house, a branch of his father’s in Galway. He
amassed a handsome fortune in Bruges and three of his children were born
there. While engaged in business in Bruges he became acquainted with Don
Thomas Stoughton, a merchant having commercial relations with France and
Spain. Eventually, Lynch and Stoughton formed a co-partnership for the
purpose of conducting business in America. The articles of
co-partnership were dated March 10, 1783; the capital agreed upon was
£7,500, of which amount Lynch furnished £5,000 and Stoughton, £2,500.

[Illustration:

  HON. GEORGE F. O’NEIL,

  Binghamton, N. Y.

  A LIFE MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY.
]

Stoughton, in pursuance of the agreement, came to New York City and
opened the business house of Lynch & Stoughton. Lynch visited London and
Galway, and in 1785 sailed for America, reaching New York June 20 of
that year. Stoughton was a bachelor, and Mr. and Mrs. Lynch, their three
children and a number of servants, went to reside with him. Later,
Stoughton was made Spanish consul at New York. Eventually, differences
broke out between the partners, the firm was dissolved and each member
sued the other. These two suits in chancery, Stoughton _vs._ Lynch and
Lynch _vs._ Stoughton, were tried before Chancellor Kent and after
pending for over twenty years, were finally decided adverse to Lynch.

The latter had to pay Stoughton, besides fines and costs, $25,076. After
the dissolution of the firm, Lynch retired in affluent circumstances
largely on account of the wealth he had amassed in Bruges. It was said
of him in New York that “he dispensed a bountiful and refined
hospitality.” He was an earnest Catholic, gave liberally of his means to
forward church work and was one of the representative men who signed the
“Catholic Address” to George Washington. It is said of Lynch that upon
arriving in New York, in 1785, he brought a large amount of specie with
him and the advent of a man with such extensive financial resources
created quite a stir. He was at one time offered, for what would today
be considered a ridiculously small sum, a farm of twenty acres near City
Hall, New York.

He declined to buy the property, but with the same amount of money
purchased 697 acres near Fort Stanwix on the Mohawk River. Before the
year 1800 he had increased his holdings there to about 2,000 acres. As
early as 1796, he laid this property out in village lots, and called the
place Lynchville. Later, he changed the name to Rome, perhaps in honor
of the Eternal City. Between the years 1800 and 1820, he built a woolen
mill, a cotton factory and a saw-mill at Rome, which place he had
founded. It is said that the southeast corner of Fort Stanwix was
levelled to make room for a mansion erected by him. In 1797, Dominick
purchased an estate in West Chester County, N. Y., bordering Long Island
Sound. Here he built a magnificent stone residence after the style of
chateaus he had seen in Flanders. This was his home for the remainder of
his life. He continued to dispense “munificent hospitality, took a
leading part in the social events of the metropolis, and manifested to
the end a zealous and active zeal in the growth of the Catholic church
in New York.”

He died in 1825 and his widow in 1849. At his death his children were
thirteen in number, _i. e._—James, Anastasia, Anthony, Dominick,
Alexander, Margaret, Jasper, Jane, Henry, Harriet, Louisa, Edward and
William. By the marriage of these children, the family has become allied
with many of the old families of New York and Pennsylvania, including
the Tillotsons, Shippens, Leas, Laurences, Nortons, Luquers, Pringles,
Maitlands, Harveys, Ridgways, etc. James Lynch, the oldest of Dominick’s
thirteen children, resided in Rome, N. Y., represented Oneida County in
the state legislature for several years, and was later a judge of the
Court of Sessions, and of the Marine, now City, Court, of New York.
Dominick Lynch, 2d, at the time of, and after, his father’s death became
a prominent merchant in New York City. This second Dominick was spoken
of as “the most fashionable man in New York.” He made quite a reputation
as proprietor of Lynch’s Chateau Margeaux, Lynch’s Sauterne and Lynch’s
Lucca Oil. It is said of him that he “coined money and spent it with the
freedom of a prince,” and that he “went into the best society.” He
resided on Greenwich Street “opposite the Battery.” He died in 1844. He
“was a Roman Catholic as his father had been.”

Dominick Lynch, 3d, grandson of the first Dominick, was a man of great
public spirit, an elegant conversationalist and the possessor of musical
talents. He became a naval officer, served under Perry in the Mexican
war, and was also in the Civil War. He died in 1884. Dominick Lynch,
4th, was a lieutenant in the Fourth U. S. Cavalry and died some years
ago. Speaking of the Lynches and others, Barrett’s _Old Merchants of New
York City_ says: “These Irish families are the cream of the cream of the
old families here.”




                   A SHIP FROM IRELAND IS CAST AWAY.


The ship _Alknomac_ sailed from the river of Sligo, Ireland, in October,
1811, with 79 passengers. After a passage of 73 days she was cast away
at Martha’s Vineyard, Mass. The passengers and crew were rescued and
spent nine days there. Captain Hicks, who commanded the _Alknomac_, at
length provided a sloop in which the passengers embarked for New York.
Unfavorable weather continuing, the sloop was driven ashore at Newport,
R. I., December 24, 1811, where passengers and crew were again landed.
The New York _Shamrock_, describing the incident, says: “Commodore
Rodgers was on the Newport station when 79 Irish passengers were landed
from a wrecked vessel. He humanely tendered the hand of hospitality and
liberally provided them with every necessary to enable them to proceed
to New York, the port of their original destination. Eight of the
passengers who have come by land were supplied with money, and the
others who remained waiting for a passage by water, received money,
provisions and every necessary aid from the American commander.”




          INCIDENT OF AN EXPEDITION UNDER GEN. JOHN SULLIVAN.


                    BY G. FRANK RADWAY, UTICA, N. Y.

Otsego Lake, in central New York, possesses not only the charm of
romance due to the pen of Fenimore Cooper, but also an historical
interest. In the year 1779 an expedition was sent against the hostile
Indians around Lake Cayuga. A brigade under the command of Gen. James
Clinton, the brother of George Clinton and father of DeWitt Clinton
(each of whom held the office of governor of New York at one time), went
up the Mohawk and then cut across through the forest, to the head of the
Otsego, finally encamping at the foot of the lake.

The Susquehanna at its source is a very narrow stream and did not permit
the floating of the 220 boats brought along by the troops. An ingenious
plan was devised to overcome this difficulty. The small gorge through
which the river flows as it leaves the lake was dammed, thereby
collecting the waters. When a sufficient amount had been collected, the
troops embarked, the dam was knocked out, and the boats were carried by
the flood to a point near Tioga, where the brigade joined the forces
under General Sullivan. It is said that the Indians along the banks,
beholding the overflow of the river in summer, without any apparent
reason, thought that it was an interposition of the Great Spirit, and
fled in terror. The site of the dam has been suitably marked by the
Otsego Chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution.




                   IRISH BUILDERS OF THE WHITE HOUSE.


               BY MARTIN I. J. GRIFFIN, PHILADELPHIA, PA.

Not only were Catholics—L’Enfant, the Frenchman, and Dermott, the
Irishman—the planners of the Federal City, Washington, but a Catholic,
James Hoban, a native of Ireland, was the architect and builder of the
president’s palace, as it was first called, the president’s house as
later designated, but better known as the White House.

Hoban was born in Kilkenny, Ireland, in 1758. When only twenty-two years
old he won a medal from the Dublin Society for “drawings of brackets,
stairs, roof, etc.” It is now in possession of his grandson, James
Hoban, of Washington. He came to this country after the revolution and
soon became known as an architect and builder.

When, in 1791, Washington visited South Carolina, writes Mr. Griffin,
Colonel Laurens and others recommended to him the abilities as an
architect and the executive worth of James Hoban, the Kilkenny Irishman,
who had, since his arrival, added to the growth and adornment of the
neighborhood by the exercise of that skill and ingenuity which the new
country so much needed.

Mr. Hoban went to Washington city and submitted to the commissioners a
plan for the president’s palace. His plan was accepted immediately and
without hesitation after a view of the drawings which were submitted.

Hoban’s plan of the president’s palace being adopted, the selection of
the site on which to erect it required the personal attention of
Washington himself. So on August 2, 1792, the commissioners and
President Washington “viewed the ground, particularly at the place for
the palace. It has given him considerable trouble and difficulty to fix
his mind,” wrote the commissioners.

Hoban’s design of the president’s house contemplated a central building
with wings. The central portion was executed according to his designs
and under his supervision (we are told he received 300 guineas a year
for his services)—both before and after the damage by the British in
1814. The north portico was not completed until 1820, and then according
to Hoban’s plan. Its popular name of the White House is due to his
thought of painting the brownstone fronting the exterior walls to
conceal the discoloration by smoke and fire.

Cornelius McDermott Roe, Patrick McDermott Roe and John Delahunty had
the contract for all the brick and stone work on the president’s house
for one season, and John Kearney did all the plastering on the capitol.

Thus far in our investigations we have found that a Catholic was one of
the commissioners; that two Catholics planned the city; that a Catholic
designed and built the president’s house and also superintended the
erection of the capitol, which three Catholics contracted to build, and
another did the plastering, while Patrick Whalen dug the cellar. Surely
Irish Catholics seem to have had a goodly share in the foundation of the
Capital City.

Mr. Hoban died on December 9, 1831, and was buried in St. Patrick’s
Cemetery. In May, 1863, his grandson and namesake, James Hoban, Esq.,
purchased a lot in Mount Olivet Cemetery, near Washington, and the
remains of James Hoban and others of the family were removed thereto.




           COL. FRANCIS BARBER, A SOLDIER OF THE REVOLUTION.


                 BY JAMES L. O’NEILL, ELIZABETH, N. J.

Patrick Barber was born in County Longford, Ireland, and was the father
of Col. Francis Barber, who was a gallant soldier of the American
Revolution. The colonel himself was born (1751) in Princeton, N. J., and
long resided in Elizabethtown, N. J.

The father, Patrick, had come over in the same ship with Clinton. They
are said to have been kinsmen. After a perilous voyage lasting some four
months, they finally reached New York, where Clinton remained, Barber
continuing on to Princeton, N. J.

Patrick Barber resided in Princeton for years and here were born four of
his sons—Francis, John, William and Joseph. Col. Francis Barber
graduated from Princeton College after securing for himself a
distinguished reputation for his classical attainments. As we may infer
from the character of Elizabethtown’s first settlers, much attention was
paid to the subject of education by the people. And to this we may
attribute the strong influence which for a long time it maintained in
the province. We find in 1767, a Mr. Pemberton and a Mr. Reeves at the
head of a school. In 1769, they left the institution and Francis Barber
was appointed to fill the vacancy. He continued in the position until
the commencement of the war, a period when teachers and many scholars
left the quiet pursuits of science and rushed to arms for the defence of
the country.

In 1776, Mr. Barber received from Congress a commission as major of the
Third Battalion of New Jersey troops, and at the close of the year he
was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the Third Jersey Regiment.
Subsequently, he became assistant inspector-general under Baron Steuben,
who expressed a high opinion of his ability and services. Colonel Barber
was in constant service during the whole war. With his regiment he
served under General Schuyler at the north. He was at the battles of
Ticonderoga, Trenton, Princeton, Brandywine, Germantown and Monmouth,
and came near losing his life in the latter.

He was at one time adjutant-general under Sullivan. He served with
distinction in the Wyoming Valley and Indian troubles. He was actively
engaged in the battle of Springfield. In 1781, he was at the capture of
the British army at Yorktown. Colonel Barber, although not more than
thirty years at his death, had twice married, one of his helpmates,
being the daughter of Moses Ogden, whose residence was the old town home
that still stands on the north side of Elizabeth Avenue below Reed
Street.

So close was his friendship with Lafayette that they exchanged swords.
The sword Lafayette gave Barber is now in the Washington headquarters at
Newburgh, N. Y., while the one Barber gave in exchange is preserved in
Paris. Speaking of men noted in the military world, a few years ago,
General Stryker, president of the Society of the Cincinnati, at the
meeting of that organization, which was attended by William P. Barber,
said that he considered Colonel Barber an ideal soldier. W. P. Barber is
a great great-grandson of Colonel Barber. Colonel Barber was the tutor
of Alexander Hamilton.

[Illustration:

  GEN. PHELPS MONTGOMERY.

  New Haven, Conn.

  A MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY.
]

After having escaped the dangers of the many military campaigns, Colonel
Barber was finally killed, 1783, by a most peculiar accident. Just after
peace had been declared, General Washington summoned all his officers to
meet him at his headquarters in Newburgh. Colonel Barber was on his way
there, and but a few miles distant, when he came upon a gang of men
chopping down trees in a piece of woods. One of the men called to him in
a warning tone to stop his horse, just as a tree had started to topple
over in his path. The chopper thought the tree was going to fall another
way, but it struck and killed the unsuspecting officer, who realized his
danger too late to save himself. Had he been allowed to go on without
stopping, a life of such inestimable value to his country would without
doubt have been saved. He was a fine scholar, a skillful and brave
officer and rendered great and important services to his country.




                   CONCERNING THE IRISH MONTGOMERYS.


In the _New York Herald_, September 10, 1905, is a statement by “L. W.,
London, England,” giving many details of interest concerning the
ancestry and family of Gen. Richard Montgomery. The statement appears in
the genealogical department of the _Herald_, of that date, which
department is conducted by Mrs. Clara H. Manning. The statement is in
answer to a correspondent and is as follows:

“H. W. N.’s family tradition is at fault. Gen. Richard Montgomery had no
sister Elizabeth. His only sister was Sarah, wife of Charles Jones,
fourth Viscount Planelagh, and mother of thirteen children. General
Montgomery had brothers, John and Alexander. John died unmarried in
Lisbon, 1786. His administration is in the Prerogative Court of Ireland.
Alexander, the brother, was captain in the Forty-third Regiment and
member of the Irish Parliament for County Donegal; died unmarried
September 29, 1800. His will is in the Prerogative Court of Ireland.
Lady Planelagh and her three brothers were the children of Thomas
Montgomery, of Swords, near Dublin, eldest son of Alexander Montgomery,
of Ballyleek, who married Mary Francklyn.

“Thomas Montgomery had several brothers and sisters. His brother,
Robert, of Brandram, County Monaghan, married Sarah Maxwell. This is the
nearest Maxwell connection. Thomas had many cousins. Ulster has many
Montgomerys of other lines. It is said the Earl of Mount Alexander could
ride at the head of a regiment all Montgomerys. At one time in the Irish
Parliament were six Montgomerys all over six feet in height and the
handsomest men in Dublin.... By far [one of] the most noted family of
modern times is that of the Montgomerys of Grey Abbey, County Down, a
famous military stock.

“For all this they have a pedigree made in the eighteenth century to
take them on to the famous old Grey Abbey stock of the early Ulster
settlement. As a fact, they are descended from a thrifty yeoman who
purchased Grey Abbey after the old stock had died out. No American
Montgomerys can prove any near connection with either the Montgomerys of
Ballyleek or the Earls of Mount Alexander. The nearest probable American
connection is not of the Montgomery name, being that of the descendants
of Thomas Patterson, who emigrated from County Donegal to Philadelphia
at the time of the Irish rebellion. Thomas Patterson was grandson of
Alleriah Montgomery, said by tradition to be a cousin of the general.
Her marriage certificate in the diocese of Raphoe indicates her as
coming from the vicinity of the general’s family, being about his age
and not belonging to any other of the Montgomery families in that part
of Ireland.”




                      HEROES OF MONTGOMERY’S ARMY.


In the city of Quebec, Canada, is a tablet on which is inscribed the
following:

                   Within this building and directly
                       Beneath this tablet repose
                  The remains of thirteen soldiers of
                       General Montgomery’s army,
                Who were killed in the assault on Quebec
                            Dec. 31st, 1775.
                   Placed to their memory by several
                           American children.




              A GLANCE AT SOME PIONEER IRISH IN THE SOUTH.


                 BY MICHAEL J. O’BRIEN, NEW YORK CITY.

No section of the Union presents a wider or more diversified field for
historical inquiry than the Carolinas and Virginia.

All the territory from the Delaware River south to Cape Fear was named
“Virginia” by the English, and it is generally supposed that it was in
the present state of Virginia the earliest colonists landed. It was,
however, the Indians of North Carolina who were the first to set eyes on
the white men who came to America with the famous navigator, Sir Walter
Raleigh, in the year 1584.

Among these first-comers to the Carolinas Irishmen are found, and in the
resistance to the authority and encroachments of the British organized
in that section many years later, the sons of Erin and their descendants
are recorded as having played an honorable and prominent part.

In Hakluyt’s _Voyages, Navigations, Traffiques and Discouveries of the
English Nation_ are found some interesting facts relating to the first
voyages of the English, under Raleigh and his lieutenants, to the
western world. Richard Hakluyt was one of those who accompanied Raleigh
on his first voyage of discovery in 1584. His _Voyages and
Discouveries_, now a work of extreme rarity (it was published in London
over 300 years ago), is by all odds the most celebrated book ever
written on the subject, and forms the basis of all true history of the
colonization of the Carolinas and Virginia. It is printed in the old
English text of the sixteenth century, which renders its examination a
task as laborious as it is interesting. The writer has examined the copy
of this famous work in the Astor Library, and we are sure our readers
will be interested in learning something of its contents at this stage.

The second voyage was undertaken by Sir Richard Greenville in the year
1585. The company comprised 107 persons. Hakluyt’s great work (page 254,
volume 3) contains “an account of the particulars of the employments of
the Englishmen left in Virginia by Sir Richard Greenville under the
charge of Master Ralph Lane, general of the same, from August 17, 1585,
to June 18, 1586.”

It will be observed that Greenville refers to “the Englishmen left in
Virginia.” This would lead the ordinary reader to the conclusion that
the expedition was comprised of Englishmen only, but such an assumption
would be erroneous. In those days Ireland had a merchant marine of her
own, and the ships which sailed from Irish ports, and indeed not a few
of those whose home ports were in England, were manned by Irish seamen.
(See Marmion’s _Maritime Ports of Ireland_.) What more natural,
therefore, than to expect that Irish names should be found among the
lists of these “Englishmen?” All of the early histories of the southern
colonies refer to the first settlers as English. No suggestion is ever
made, as far as the writer can find, that these first-comers may not all
have been English, or that any Irish people were amongst them. Yet it is
a fact that Irishmen came too in search of adventure, and no better
testimony in support of that assertion can be adduced than the lists of
the names of the persons who came on these colonizing expeditions.

Here are some of the names from Greenvilles’ list, as they were written
down at the time: Edward Kelley, R. Courtney, Hugh Rogers, Thomas Fox,
Darby “Glande,” Edward Nugent, John “Costigo” (Costigan), James Lafie,
Francis Norris, Richard Moore, Richard Ireland, Matthew Lyne, Dennis
Barnes, “Denice” Carroll, Robert Young, Thomas Hesket, Richard Humphrey
and R. Griffin. Many of these, undoubtedly, were natives of Ireland.
This is said to have been the first English colony that settled in
America, the previous expedition having returned with its entire
company.

They entered Pamlico Sound from the Atlantic by what is now known as New
Inlet, and then landed at Roanoke Island, thence crossed over to the
mainland to the eastern portion of North Carolina, just south of
Norfolk, Va. They followed the course of the Chowan River for a short
distance, and soon came in contact with the Indians. Hakluyt’s work
contains an interesting narrative of the voyage and of the explorations
of the party in Virginia, written by Ralph Lane, in which long accounts
are given of their encounters with the savage Indians. In his account of
one fight, on the first of June, 1586, he refers to the bravery of “one
of my Irish boys,” who shot Pemisapan, the king of the Indians, “athwart
the buttocks with my petronell.” The Irish boy’s shot did not, however,
bring down the Indian king, and the wily redskin, with a number of his
warriors, managed to escape into the dense forest.

But then, another Irishman, who was not afraid to face the Indian band
singlehanded, was there to finish the work of the youthful adventurer
from Erin, “for,” writes Lane, “in the end an Irishman serving me, one
Nugent, and the deputy provost undertook him”—that is to say,
volunteered to capture or kill the Indian king—“and I, in some doubt
lest we had lost both the king and my man, by our own negligence to have
been intercepted by the savages, we met him returning out of the woods
with Pemisapan’s head in his hands.”

The place where the bold Irishman, Edward Nugent, and the nameless youth
thus earned such prominent mention in early American history has been
located as in Chowan County, near the present town of Edenton, N. C.

It seems that in all of the early voyages of the English to the American
continent the adventurous Irishman was present. On Raleigh’s first
voyage the largest ship was commanded by a Captain Butler, and Captain
Edward Hayes commanded a vessel in the expedition of Sir H. Gilbert to
Newfoundland in 1583. Sixteen years earlier, 1567, Robert Barrett and
John Garrett commanded ships in the expedition to Mexico under Sir John
Hawkins. There is nothing to show that these captains were of the Irish
nation, but their names have been for centuries so common in Ireland
that we venture to include them in this category.

In 1568, when Hawkins arrived in the Gulf of Mexico, he put ashore a
company comprising 68 men under Miles Philips, a little north of Panuco.
From the curiously-worded narrative of Miles Philips, entitled “The
voyages from Panuco, thence to Mexico, and afterwards to sundry other
places, having remained in the counterey 15 or 16 yeeres together, and
noted many things most worthy of observation,” which is contained in
Hakluyt’s third volume, we glean some interesting information.

The whole company was captured by a band of Indians and Spaniards, and
immediately haled before the governor, who “visited them with the
terrors of the Inquisition.” John Gray, John and Thomas Browne, John
Mooney, James Collier and John Rider were sentenced to receive 200
lashes on horseback and to serve eight years in the galleys; others of
the company received various terms of servitude, while others were
condemned to serve as servants or slaves in the monasteries. Three were
condemned to be burned to ashes, and the inhuman sentence was carried
out in the market place of the City of Mexico on the day preceding Good
Friday in the year 1575.

The three unfortunates were George Riuely (Reilly), Peter Momfrie and
“Cornelius.” Philips was unacquainted with the full name of the latter,
but in order to distinguish him from another of the party who bore the
same Christian name, he refers to him as “Cornelius the Irishman.” In
relating the circumstances of his subsequent escape, Philips stated that
several of the adventurers, after the expiration of their terms of
servitude, remained in Mexico, married native women, and some prospered
in the new country.

The same volume of Hakluyt (page 286) contains the story of “The Fourth
Voyage, made to Virginia in 1587, wherein was transported the Second
Colony,” written by the commander, Captain John White. The narrative
runs in part:

“On the first day of July (1587) we weighed anchor at Musketo’s Bay,
upon the fourth side of St. John’s Island, where were left behind two
Irishmen of our company, Darbie Glaven and Dennis Carrell, thence
bearing along the coast of St. John’s till evening.” The vessels
anchored in the bay for the purpose of securing a supply of salt, which
Simon Fernando, who was with Raleigh on the first expedition, had
informed White could be procured on the island. The two hardy Irishmen,
Glaven and Carrell, were selected to go ashore and procure the necessary
supply. They proceeded inland, but, during their absence, Fernando, for
some reason that does not appear, persuaded the commander to weigh
anchor, and before the two unfortunates had returned to the shore, the
vessels were far on their way. It would be interesting if we could
follow the fortunes of the two Irish castaways among the Indians of the
Danish West Indies, but history contains no further account of them.

In the following September, when one of the vessels of the expedition
was on its return to England, she encountered a great storm. The crew
and passengers were in sore straits on account of the lack of food and
water, expecting to perish by famine at sea. On October 16, however,
when they had almost given up in despair, they sighted land, which
proved to be the coast of Kerry. By the aid of “a hulke of Dublin” they
entered Smerwick Bay, where the inhabitants at once succored them. White
relates that the whole company was brought ashore at “Dingen a Cos,”
where the sick sailors and passengers were taken care of by the local
doctor.

[Illustration:

  HON. JOHN S. WHALEN.

  New York Secretary of State.

  A MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY.
]

The writer of the narrative pays a well-merited tribute to the
inhabitants of Smerwick and Dingle for their timely and spontaneous aid.
They stayed at Smerwick for over two weeks; there White distributed some
potato plants among the people, “the first ever seen in Europe.” It is
generally supposed that it was Raleigh who first brought the potato
plant to Europe, but according to White’s account, it was he who
introduced it, and that it was the inhabitants of the County of Kerry
who were the first Europeans to taste the esculent tuber.

Could John White, who wrote the official account of, and commanded this
expedition, have been an Irishman? His story of the fifth voyage is
dated “from my house at Newtown, in Kilmore, the fourth of February,
1593.” There is no such place as Kilmore in England, but there are
several such places in Ireland, and the name is distinctively Irish. The
town of Dingle, County Kerry, has always been and even is still known to
the inhabitants as “Dingen a Cos.” It will be observed that White
referred to the town by its Irish, not by its Anglicized appellation,
which, to some, may be suggestive that a knowledge of the Gaelic
language, which, happily, most Irishmen spoke in those days, was one of
the accomplishments of the historian mariner.

And is it not highly probable that White and his officers, who came to
form such friendly intercourse with the fisher-folk of the Kerry coast,
may have informed them of “the great land beyond the sea,” with the
result that, on his subsequent voyages to Virginia, he was accompanied
by not a few of the hardy natives of the Kingdom of Kerry?

After the forfeiture of the immense estates of the Desmonds in Munster
in 1584, Raleigh came into possession of 12,000 acres in Cork, Waterford
and Tipperary. He built and made his home in the castle of Lismore, and
soon after established at the neighboring ports of Waterford and Youghal
a large trade in lumber and barrel staves with France and Spain. His
ships were largely manned by Irish sailors, and it is entirely within
the bounds of probability that Raleigh impressed into his transatlantic
crews some of the sailors and fishermen of the Munster coast.

In the charter which Raleigh received from the English crown on March
27, 1585, empowering him to hold the lands which he had colonized in
America and apportion them among the colonists, reference is made to
“persons from England and Ireland,” thus showing that Irishmen were
among the first white settlers of the western world.

Among those who landed in North Carolina from White’s fourth expedition,
and “remayned to inhabite there,” were Thomas Coleman, Edward and
Winifred Powell, James Hyndes, William and Henry Browne, Thomas Ellis,
Michael Millet, James Lafie, Maurice Allen, Richard Berry, Dennis and
Margery Harvie, William Waters, Martin Sutton, Hugh Patterson, Thomas
Humphrey and John and Brian “Wyles.” Most of these names are common to
Britain as well as to Ireland, but, without doubt, some of them were
natives of Ireland.

These colonists all either perished from famine or were slain by the
savage enemy. Some are supposed to have sought asylum among the Hatteras
Indians at Croatoan, who were friendly to the whites. Lawson, one of the
historians of North Carolina, writing in 1714 of the natives of
Croatoan, relates how the Indians told him that some of their ancestors
were white people and “could talk in a book as we do,” and that many of
the Hatteras Indians had gray eyes, which are known only among whites.

In his account of the fifth voyage, White tells of their arrival at the
mouth of the Roanoke on August 17, 1590. A great storm raged; the ship’s
boats were tossed about at the mercy of the waves, and eleven of the
company drowned, among them Edward Kelly, Edward Kilborne and Robert
Coleman. These three are mentioned as “among 7 of the chiefest men of
the expedition.”

Hawk, one of the historians of North Carolina, says that “in 1666 the
Lords Proprietors had agents employed in seeking emigrants on the
continent of Europe, and in Ireland, Scotland and the West Indies,” and
the same author in referring to the divers religious beliefs professed
by the people of North Carolina (about 1700), refers to “the Irish
Romanists.” It is to be regretted that we have no means of tracing the
names or careers of any of those “Irish Romanists.”

Hewatt’s _Historical Account of the Rise and Progress of the Colonies of
South Carolina and Georgia_ (published at London in the year 1776), is
referred to by historians as an authoritative work. In this book many
references are made to the early Irish settlers of the Carolinas. The
author describes the dreadful extremities to which the poor settlers in
the vicinity of Charlestown (now Charleston), S. C., were reduced in the
year 1667.

During the government of Sir John Yeamans a civil disturbance broke out
among the colonists, which threatened the ruin of the settlement. “The
Proprietors,” says Hewatt, “were unable to furnish the colony with
regular supplies, and the spots of sandy and barren land poorly rewarded
their toil. Many of them were unskilled, and the European grain which
they were accustomed to sow soon proved suitable to neither soil nor
climate. The settlers began to murmur against the Proprietors and to
curse the day they left their native land to starve in a wilderness.
While they gathered oysters for subsistence with one hand, they were
obliged to carry the musket in the other for defence against the
Indians.”

In this emergency, a true son of Ireland is seen to have been in the
forefront of the battles waged by the afflicted colonists. Florence
O’Sullivan was one of the leading men among the settlers of Charlestown,
some of whom were his countrymen, and to whom they looked for guidance
and counsel. O’Sullivan is said to have come to South Carolina with
Governor Sayle. He was surveyor-general of the province until he was
succeeded by John Culpeper in 1671. He is thought to have been of the
famous family of that name whose paternal home was on the borders of
Cork and Kerry, and which gave to America schoolmasters, governors, a
celebrated general of the Revolutionary army, and in later days men who
distinguished themselves in every sphere of activity in the new country.

To add to the troubles between the colonists and the Indians, it is
related that about this time there was great fear among the Carolinians
of an invasion by the Spaniards from the South. Militia companies were
formed in and around Charlestown to resist invasion, and O’Sullivan had
been placed in command of a body of men on an island in the harbor—now
known as Sullivan’s Island. Their situation was one of great danger and
they were instructed to warn the inhabitants on the first approach of
the enemy, and then return to shore. “The great gun”—evidently the only
one available—was in the immediate charge of O’Sullivan.

The Spaniards did not put in an appearance; the scanty supplies of the
party soon gave out, but they stuck to their post until starvation
stared them in the face. They remained until all hope had fled that
their supplies would be replenished, and when they were not forthcoming,
O’Sullivan and his men, deciding that to perish from hunger would be an
inglorious end, deserted the island without consulting the governor and
joined the discontented party in the town.

Thereupon, we are told, the people became ungovernable and threatened to
compel the authorities to relinquish the settlement. O’Sullivan was
arrested by the town marshal and “compelled to find security for his
good behavior.” Vessels were despatched to Virginia and to Barbadoes for
provisions, but, before they returned, a ship arrived from Europe with
supplies and a number of new settlers. “The newcomers revived the
drooping spirits of the people and encouraged them to engage in more
vigorous efforts. The governor, sensible of the hardships the people had
suffered, readily forgave them,” and O’Sullivan and his friends were
released from further restraint.

The Spanish authorities at St. Augustine, “on learning the belated news
of the discontented and miserable condition of the Carolina colonists,”
advanced with an armed party as far as St. Helena Island, about 50 miles
south of Charlestown, to dislodge or destroy the settlers. Brian
Fitzpatrick, a well-known “character” of the settlement, is said to have
deserted his friends at this juncture and to have gone over to the
Spaniards. What his purpose was in doing so does not appear. However,
reinforcements arrived to aid the Carolinians, upon which the Spaniards
evacuated St. Helena and retreated to Augustine.

After the death of Governor Yeamans in 1674, the inhabitants called a
meeting at Charlestown, when they elected representatives for the
purpose of making laws for the government of the colony. Thomas Gray,
Henry Hughes, Maurice Mathews and Christopher Portman were the four
deputies chosen by the people.

In 1680 Richard Kirle, who is described as “an Irish gentleman,”
succeeded to the governorship, but he died six months after taking the
reins of office.

Elsewhere we have referred to the wholesale exportation of the Irish by
Cromwell, mainly to the Island of Barbadoes, during the first half of
the seventeenth century. In time, those who survived the tropical
climate became freemen, and eventually even some became landowners,
planters and the business men of the island. Numbers of them, on gaining
their freedom, sailed for the American coast with their families. They
had been apprised of the opportunities open for them in the South, as
the planters of Virginia and the Carolinas had their agents in the West
Indies inducing them to settle on the mainland. In John Camden Hotten’s
famous work, there is a list of those who departed from Barbadoes in the
year 1678, which is described in this quaint language:

“List of what Ticqtts. have been granted out of the Secretary’s office
of the Island of Barbadoes for departure off this island of the several
psones hereafter menconed, beginning in January, 1678, and ending in
December following.”

These are seen to have sailed for Virginia and the Carolinas and other
American colonies:

 John Blake
 Teague Bowhane
 Michael Bradley
 Martin Brearly
 John Brett
 Francis Browne
 Hugh Browne
 William Browne
 Dennis Burne
 Elinor Butler
 John Butler
 Walter Butler
 Thomas Callay
 Dennis Canting
 Richard Carey
 John Collins
 William Corbett
 William Courtney
 Francis Cox
 John Daniell
 Jane Densy
 Bridgett Douse
 Dennis Dowell
 John Downing
 Cornelius Dunnohoe
 Jeffory Dunnohoe
 Teag Dunnohoe
 John Earley
 Andrew Fanning
 Hugh Farrell
 Roger Farrell
 Thomas Feaghery
 Teage Finn
 Edward Fitzjames
 Christopher Flavell
 Edmond Fleming
 Francis Ford
 William Gogin
 Dennis Griffin
 Dennis Haley
 Elizabeth Harley
 William Healy
 Daniel Hendley
 Elizabeth Hendley
 Katherine Hetherington
 Andrew Hughes
 Dennis Hunt
 John Fitz Jarrell
 Michael Jennings
 William Jennings
 William Jordan
 Elinor Kennedy
 Jno. Kennedy
 Alice Lynch
 Morgan Lynch
 Nicholas Lynch
 Charles Maccmash
 John Maccinree
 Owen Macclahan
 Patrick MacDaniell
 Owen Magwaine
 John Mahane
 James Mahone
 Daniel Mahony
 Andrew Mannen
 Cornelius Marrow
 Katherine Marrow
 Timothy Melony
 James Melloly
 Daniel Murphy
 Martin Neagle
 Ann Oneal
 Mary Poor
 Miles Poor
 John Quirk
 Luke Rainey
 Katherine Reddin
 James Rice
 John Rice
 Teigue Skahane
 Walter Stapleton
 John Sutton
 John Teague
 Edmond Welch

On one ship, the _True Friendship_, commanded by Capt. Charles Kallahan,
these sailed from Barbadoes:

 Jeoffrey Burke
 Thomas Clovan
 Richard Lynch
 Patrick Maddin
 Thomas Swiney
 Samuel Wall

Those who left Barbadoes for America in the year 1678 are the only ones
recorded by Hotten, but for many years there was a constant stream of
wanderers leaving the West Indies for the American coast. We are as yet
unable to procure any records but those of the year 1678.

Thus we see what a great infusion of Irish blood Virginia and the
Carolinas received in the year 1678 alone. Some of these were servants,
but among them also were men of family, who either settled down on the
plantations or received grants of uncultivated lands themselves, which,
in course of time, they converted into fruitful estates. It has been
well said that “the fighting races don’t die out,” and surely the blood
of these early Gaels must have been a potent factor in moulding the
Americans of later generations in the South.

Irish families are invariably large, and as the same homely virtue is
usually practised by their descendants, it will not be deemed an
exaggeration when we say that thousands of the present natives of the
South are descended directly or indirectly from the Irish colonizers
from Barbadoes of the last half of the seventeenth century. There is no
system of calculation by which we could arrive at any adequate idea of
the probable number of American descendants of those early settlers,
but, if we adopt the simple method of taking the number of generations
that have elapsed since their coming, and then apportion, say an average
of five persons to each family for each succeeding generation, we can
safely conclude that when American historians refer to the pioneers of
the South as wholly “of Anglo-Saxon origin,” they are playing fast and
loose with their imaginations.

The provincial authorities were anxious to attract immigrants to open up
the virgin forest and extend the bounds of their domain, so we find them
in communication with the government agents in England and Ireland,
offering the most flattering inducements to all who desired to settle in
the new country.

Farmers, artisans and agricultural laborers were particularly needed,
while they objected to the importation of convicts and other undesirable
persons. Irish political refugees were sometimes classed as “convicts,”
and while the provincial history, supported by other testimony of an
indubitable character, indicates that great numbers of Irish “convicts”
settled in Virginia, it is seen that once they had landed on the soil,
they were, in a manner, “tolerated” and permitted to stay, and
accordingly were parcelled out among the planters and others who needed
the services of able-bodied men.

The privations suffered by those imported Irish “convicts” under the
vassalage of their colonial masters are, in some cases, beyond
description, and would shake the credulity of the most sympathetic. Many
of them occupied even lower positions than the Southern slaves of a
later day. Not only were they the tillers of the soil, the woodsmen of
the forest, and the builders of the highways, but they occupied “the
firing line” in the resistance of the planters to the attacks of the
savage redskins. Here where the ravages of the Indians were so terrible,
these Irishmen and boys, so rudely torn from their own country,
inflicted on savagery many a mortal blow and opened the way for the
civilization whose fruits we now enjoy.

The continued cry for settlers attracted the avarice of many of the
Cromwellian adventurers in Ireland, who thus became most efficient aids
in carrying on the barbarous work of the English commissioners, who were
appointed by government to exterminate the Irish.

As Prendergast relates in his _Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland_, they
had agents actively engaged throughout Ireland, “who were authorized by
Parliament to seize women, orphans and the destitute to be transported
to Barbadoes and the plantations of Virginia.” Among the destitute were
those whose ancient properties had been confiscated by the crown and
many of whom had become wanderers over the stricken island, or had
become inmates of the workhouses. “The commissioners for Ireland,” says
Prendergast, “issued orders to the governors of garrisons to deliver all
prisoners of war; to the jail-keepers for all offenders in their
custody; to the masters of workhouses for the destitute in their care,
and gave directions to all in authority to seize those who had no
visible means of livelihood and deliver them to the British agents.” All
unfortunates who were thus caught were quickly conducted to the
waterside and there herded like so many cattle until such time as a
sufficient number had been gathered in to embark them on board some ship
bound for the West Indies or the coast of Virginia.

Some of the English adventurers in Ireland also engaged in the business
of man-hunting on their own account, and we find from the records of
Virginia that on April 12, 1621, Sir William Newce, an English officer
who resided in the County of Cork, wrote to the governor “offering to
transport two thousand persons to Virginia.” The same records indicate
that Daniel Gookin, an Irish Quaker merchant of Cork City, was in the
business of transporting cattle from Ireland to Virginia. On one
occasion, he came in person to the colony, and, seeing the probable
advantages of a permanent settlement in the country, he sailed from Cork
in the _Flying Harte_ with a large number of his countrymen, who, we are
told, “were exceedingly well furnished with all sorts of provisions and
cattle,” and landed at Newport News in November, 1621.

Notwithstanding that the records of Virginia say that this large colony
came from Ireland, they are referred to by historians, who at all make
reference to them, as “English.” The fact that they were so “well
furnished” would also indicate that Ireland sent forth other colonizers
to America in those early days besides the “convicts” and the
“destitute.”

In the “Records of the London Company” (the Proprietors of Virginia),
Daniel Gookin is mentioned as having undertaken “to transport great
multitudes of people and cattle to Virginia,” and as having “received
patents for 300 people.” The records do not state from where this large
colony came, but, from the fact that their leader had formerly been a
merchant in the city of Cork, from where his first contingent sailed, it
is entirely within the bounds of probability that the second colony was
largely, if not entirely, composed of Munstermen.

In 1622 many of the colonists were massacred by Indians, after which the
remainder were ordered to abandon the outlying plantations and to
concentrate their forces about the stronger ones. Gookin’s Irish
settlement, which had been located near the mouth of the James River,
back of Newport News, was one of those ordered to be abandoned, but he
refused to obey the order, and, “gathering together his dependants, who
by that time numbered only 35, he remained at his post, to his great
credit and the content of his adventurers.” (Stith’s _History of
Virginia_.)

In 1637 Gookin received a grant of 2,500 acres of land in Upper Norfolk,
now Nansemond County, and in 1642 he was appointed commander of the
county. The court records show, under date of May 24, 1642, that “Daniel
Gookin, late of Ireland,” was still a resident of Upper Norfolk County.
His son, Daniel, left Virginia for Massachusetts, where he became
superintendent of Indian Affairs, with the title of major-general. He
was also the author of a history of the Indians. It is said that his
descendants are now very numerous in the United States.

Neill, in his _History of the English Colonization of America_, a most
authoritative work, gives in full a sermon preached at Bowe Street
Church in London in 1622, by a famous clergyman named Rev. Patrick
Copland, who had been employed by the East India Company in Barbadoes.
In this sermon he referred to “a fleete of nine sayle of ships that not
one person out of 800 who had been transported out of England and
Ireland for the plantations of Virginia, had met with any mishap by the
way.”

In a footnote to the remarks of the preacher, the historian in referring
to the great exodus from Ireland to the American colonies, remarks that
“Ireland has always been a hive from which America has derived sturdy
hewers of wood to subdue the forests.” In 1622, Rev. Patrick Copland was
appointed first president of the College of Virginia and general manager
of all its properties. The college was founded by King James in 1622 and
was established at Henrico City, fifteen miles below Richmond. (See _Old
Churches and Families of Virginia_, by Bishop William Meade.)

At this period there must have been a goodly number of Irish in
Virginia, if we are to judge from the contents of a little book,
“suitable for a projected school in Virginia,” prepared in 1621 by an
English Puritan minister named John Brinsley. The book was intended as
“a plea for learning and the school master.” The author stated that “the
incivility among manie of the Irish, the Virginians, and all other
barbarous nations” grew “from their exceeding ignorance of our Holy God
and of all true and good learning.” On another page the author said it
was his unfeigned desire to adapt the book “for all functions and
places, and more particularly to every ruder place, and more especially
to that poor Irish nation with our loving countrymen in Virginia.”

How very solicitous he was for the “uncivil” Irish! To him, of course,
they appeared rude and uncivil because they did not in those days speak
in the English tongue, but in their own undefiled and mellifluous
Gaelic. The book was presented by Brinsley “at a court held for Virginia
on December 19, 1621,” on which occasion a committee was appointed to
determine whether the book was suitable for distribution among the
school children. This circumstance is related by the historian Neill.

[Illustration:

  FRANCIS J. QUINLAN, M. D., LL. D.

  New York City.
]




        WALSH’S IRISH REGIMENT OF MARINE ARTILLERY, FRENCH ARMY.


           BY T. H. MURRAY, SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE SOCIETY.

A few years ago there was issued from the government printing office at
Washington, D. C., a volume entitled: _A Calendar of John Paul Jones
Manuscripts in the Library of Congress_.

The volume is of great interest, is arranged chronologically and
contains 883 entries. Most of these mention letters written to and from
Jones during the Revolution and cover a great deal of ground relating to
that trying period. These records are very valuable.

Frequent mention is made in them of Walsh’s Irish Regiment of Marine
Artillery, French Army, and the Calendar, as published, also mentions
other people of Irish birth or blood who took a prominent part in the
struggle for American liberty. We extract from the book:

 1779. Feb. 5 =Fitz-Maurice=, ——, Chevalier de. _A captain in Walsh’s Irish
            regiment, French army._ “Quimper.” [Quimber, France.] Letter
            to Capt. [John Paul] Johnes [Jones], L’Orient. Recommends
            “Mr. [Edward] Stack a Lieutenant of this Regiment”, who
            desires service under Jones; his abilities; recommends also
            “Mr. [Eugene] Macarty” [Macarthy]; requests that information
            be given “those Gentlemen” respecting their pay and prize
            money; it is necessary for them to obtain leave from Court;
            desires information regarding method of procedure.

 1779. Mar. 1. =Fitz-Maurice=, ——, Chevalier de. _A captain in Walsh’s Irish
            regiment, French army._ Quimper, [Quimber, France.] Letter
            to Capt. [John Paul] Jones, [L’Orient]. Acknowledges receipt
            of letter of 26th ult.; is pleased with success of his
            journey to Paris; makes him his “most sincere compliments”
            on his fine command [the _Bon Homme Richard_]; thanks him
            for his offer to accompany him; only possible by order of
            the King; “would cheerfully comply” with such orders if
            given; “our Gentlemen desire their compliments to you.”

 1779. Mar. 3. =Macarthy=, [Eugene.] _A lieutenant in Walsh’s Irish Regiment,
            French army._ Quimper, [Quimber, France.] Letter to Capt.
            [John Paul] Jones, L’Orient. Has heard that Jones has
            received the command of a frigate of 40 guns [the _Bon Homme
            Richard_] and that he desires officers; wishes to “make
            a Campaigne * * * under command of a Gentleman who has
            Distinguished himself by his Superior talents”; requests
            information on all things relating to his purpose.

 1779. Mar. — =Fitz-Maurice=, ——, Chevalier de. _A captain in Walsh’s
            Irish regiment, French army._ “Quimper”, [France.] Letter
            to [Capt. John Paul] Jones, L’Orient. Hopes he mentioned
            “Lts. [Edward] Stack and [Eugene] Macarty” [Macarthy] only
            in writing to Court; impossible for Fitz-Maurice himself
            to accompany Jones; latter should have seen that “such
            expeditions are not fitt for persons of my rank”; if Jones
            has taken any steps relative to Fitz-Maurice joining him
            hopes he will “countermand” them; requests information
            respecting the “conditions, treatment &c.” which will be
            given the “two Gentlemen” of whom he wrote. Endorsed by
            Jones: * * * rec’d May 1st.

 1779. May 20. =Fitz-Maurice=, ——, Chevalier de. _A captain in Walsh’s
            Irish regiment, French army._ “Painbœuf,” [France.] Letter
            to Capt. [John Paul] Jones, L’Orient. Acknowledges receipt
            of letter of 1st inst.; considers Jones’s offer as a mark
            of “favour and friendship”; regrets that Jones mistook the
            “sense” of his letter [of March —, 1779]; regards the
            offer [to take Fitz-Maurice on the _Bon Homme Richard_] in
            a “most flattering light”; did not desire any steps taken
            “opposite the Court” as he feared Col. [Francois Jacques
            Comte] Walsh[-Serrant]’s opposition; it might serve as an
            impediment to Fitz-Maurice’s future advancement. Addressed
            care of [James] Moiland [Moylan].

 1779. Jun. 14. =Walsh-Serrant=, [François Jacques,] Comte de. _Colonel of
            the Irish regiment of marine artillery, French army._
            Paimboeuf, [France.] Letter [to Capt. John Paul Jones,
            Groaix]. Reputation of Jones in Walsh’s regiment is such
            that [James Gerald] O’Kelly, sub-lieutenant of grenadiers,
            wishes to join his two comrades [Edward] Stack and [Eugene]
            Macarthy in serving under his command; feels it best that
            O’Kelly should serve against the common foe wherever he
            wishes; recommends him in the highest terms.

 1779. Jun. 18. =Moylan=, J[ames.] _Merchant and United States commercial
            agent at L’Orient._ L’Orient, [France.] Letter to [Capt.]
            John P[aul] Jones, [Groaix]. Introduces “Mr. [James Gerald]
            O’Kelly”; he has resigned from Walsh’s regiment in hopes of
            “going under your orders”; has strong recommendations; “he
            will cheerfully embrace” any vacancy on the “_Poor Richard_”
            [_Bon Homme Richard_].

 1779. Jun. 18. =Nesbitt=, Jonat[han.] _Banker, L’Orient._ L’Orient, [France.]
            Letter to [Capt.] John P[aul] Jones [Groaix]. Introduces
            “Mr. [James Gerald] O’Kelly, Lieutenant of Grenadiers in the
            regt. of Walsh”; his recommendations; service to O’Kelly
            will be regarded as a favor to himself.

 1779. Oct. 21. =Stack of Crotts=, _A captain in Walsh’s Irish regiment,
            French army_. “pinboeuf” [Paimboeuf, France.] Letter [to
            Capt. John Paul Jones, The Texel, Holland]. Requests
            information respecting [his son] Edmond [Edward?] Stack,
            Lieut., Walsh’s Irish regiment; was appointed [Lt. Col. of
            Marines] on the _Bon Homme Richard_; fears he is dead; if he
            has served like a “gentleman and a Soldier I Shant half
            regret his death”; “his loss will lie heavy ’pon me the rest
            of my days.”

 1779. Oct. 22. [=Stack=, Edward.] _A lieutenant in Walsh’s Irish Regiment,
            French army, and formerly Volunteer on U. S. S. “Bon Homme
            Richard.”_ The Texel, [Holland]. Affidavit respecting escape
            of deserters. Escape on Oct. 1st? of twenty-six seamen from
            the _Serapis_; with aid from the _Pallas_ sixteen men were
            captured; five were drowned and five escaped; Capt. [Denis
            Nicolas] Cottineau [de Kloguene] gave an account of this
            occurrence to the Commandant of the Road of Texel [Commodore
            —— Reimersima]. Attestation of “Lt. Col” [Antoine Felix]
            Wiebert [Wybert], Richard Dale, Samuel Stacy, John Mayrant
            and Beaumont Kroube [Groube], officers of the United States
            squadron, that the above statement is correct and that the
            deserters were enlisted and swore allegiance to the United
            States.

 1779. Nov. 25. =Walsh-Serrant=, [François Jacques,] Comte de. _Colonel of
            the Irish regiment of marine artillery, French army._
            Paris. Letter to [Edward] Stack, [The Texel?, Holland]. Has
            received orders from the [French] Court for the embarkation
            of the second battalion of his regiment for the Antilles;
            impossible for him to remain with [Capt. John] Paul Jones;
            hopes this order for his immediate return to his regiment
            will reach him through [Paul François de Quélen,] Duc de La
            Vauguyon; he has the thanks of the King [Louis XVI] for his
            brave conduct while with Jones.

 1785. Apr. 13. =Jones=, [John] Paul. _Capt., U. S. navy._ Paris. Certificate
            to [Lieut.] Edward Stack. Gives an account of Stack’s
            services on the _Bon Homme Richard_; with the consent
            of [Benjamin] Franklin gave him a commission of brevet
            lieutenant of marines in the U. S. navy; on being ordered to
            the West Indies in Nov. 1779 Stack received from Louis XVI a
            commission of captain and a reward of 400 livres; now wishes
            to join the Society of the Cincinnati; Jones has no doubt
            that he merits the honor; considers that “a similar opinion”
            from Comte d’Estaign, Comte de Rochambeau, Marquis de
            Lafayette, Marquis de Saint Simon and Col. Humphreys “at the
            foot hereof” with the payment of a months wages into the
            charitable fund of the Society will give him standing in
            America as a member.

 1785. Apr. 17. =Macarthy=, [Eugene.] _A Captain in Walsh’s Irish regiment,
            French army._ Paris. Certificate regarding “Commodore”
            [Capt. John] Paul Jones. Certifies that at the time of the
            action between the _Serapis_ and the _Bon Homme Richard_ the
            latter vessel was rendered unseaworthy; on deciding to
            abandon her the care incidental to transporting the wounded
            to the _Serapis_ prevented Jones from saving his personal
            effects or those of the crew.

 1785. Apr. 19. =Stack=, [Edward.] _A Captain in Walsh’s Irish regiment,
            French army._ Paris. Certificate regarding [Capt. John] Paul
            Jones. Certifies that neither Jones nor his crew were able
            to save their personal effects after the engagement between
            the _Bon Homme Richard_ and the _Serapis_.

One battalion of the Regiment of Walsh fought at Savannah. The rest of
the command also rendered valiant service during the war, as did
likewise the Regiment of Dillon. The following general extracts are also
from the John Paul Jones papers:

 1776. Nov. 3. =Gallagher=, Bernard. _Midshipman, U. S. brig “Providence.”_
            Boston. Letter to Capt. John [Paul] Jones, Philadelphia.
            Taken prisoner by the _Gen. Gates_, Capt. William Kilton,
            and carried into Canser [Canso, Nova Scotia]; attempted to
            escape but was captured and put in irons by Capt. [ ]
            Dawson; owing to representations of Capt. [ ] Dory was
            “fetched to Halifax”; confined for two weeks; then taken
            to Marblehead, [Massachusetts] on the _Carlisle_; arrived
            at Boston Nov. 2d with James Rogers and George Nicholson;
            left Benjamin Allen, John Fears and [ ] Munroe ill on the
            _Carlisle_; hopes to reach Philadelphia before Jones’s
            departure; wishes his chest sent to James Gallagher.

 1776. Nov. 15. =J[ones,]= J[ohn] P[aul.] _Capt., U. S. S. “Alfred.”_
            _Alfred_, off Newfoundland. Orders to Philip Brown. Appoints
            him to command the prize _Mellish_; is to accompany the
            _Alfred_ and render assistance if called on; if separated is
            to proceed to nearest port in the United States, preferably
            Rhode Island. “By order of the Senior Officer, James Hogan,
            Secretary.” Autograph draft signed.

 1777. Jan. 18. =Gallagher=, Bernard. _Master, U. S. merchant ship._
            [Philadelphia?] Letter to Capt. John Paul Jones, Boston. Has
            written two letters to him; last was sent in care of John
            Manley; wishes money due [George] Lovie [Lavie?] and [James]
            Beckup to remain unpaid until his articles [list enclosed]
            of which they disposed to widow Weeding and others in
            Newport, are returned; if money be allowed him, wishes it
            remitted to Conyngham & Nesbitt, Philadelphia merchants, of
            whose private ship he is engaged as master; the _Favorite_
            has been retaken and carried to the Bermudas; has seen [ ]
            Wesley and [ ] Hardy.

 [1777. Mar.] =Manley=, John and others. _Capts., U. S. navy._ [Boston.]
            “Uniform dress for the Navy agreed to at Boston by the major
            part of the Captains.” Signed by Captains John Manley,
            Hector McNeill, Dudley Saltonstall, E[lisha] Hinman, Joseph
            Olney, John Roche, John Paul Jones, Hector McNeill for
            Thomas Thompson, Joseph Olney for Abraham Whipple. Copy by
            Hector McNeill.

 1778. May 10. =MacNamarra=, —— Chevalier de. _Lieutenant French ship of war
            “Charmante.”_ Brest, [France.] Letter to Capt. [John Paul]
            Jones, [Brest]. Regrets not having seen him before leaving;
            desired to compliment him on his success; reasons therefor;
            “Le Chevr. de Clonard,” his friend, expresses his regrets
            also; apologizes for writing in French; will wait for him at
            San Domingues.

 1778. Nov. 10. =Moylan=, James. _Merchant and United States commercial agent
            at L’Orient._ L’Orient, [France.] Letter to Capt. J[ohn]
            P[aul] Jones, Brest. Acknowledges receipt of his letter by
            [Joseph] Whittal [Whitall]; has received his letter of 4th
            inst. also; information respecting ships suitable for
            purchase; the _Beaumont_ not yet returned from America; the
            _Turgot_ sold; recommends the _Duras_ [_Bon Homme Richard_];
            sends orders from Samuel Smalliorse of the _Hampden_ for
            £670 to [Lieut. Peter] Amiel; [Capt. Thomas] Bell sends
            “compts.”

 1778. Dec. 19. =Mehegan=, John. _Clergyman and chaplain to Comte
            d’Orvilliers._ Brest, [France.] Letter to [Capt.] John Paul
            Jones, [L’Orient]. Has not heard from him for sixteen days;
            regrets being deprived “of news of a man * * * so much
            valued and esteemed”; hopes to be informed by him respecting
            the “encouragement you so merit”; regards to [Lieut. Peter]
            Amiel; message is being sent by [ ] Le Lay; compliments to
            [James] “Moyland”; the “Colfat” wishes to be remembered; an
            escaped prisoner from the British ship _Losely_ offers Jones
            his services; [ ] Monier wishes his nephew to enlist as a
            volunteer.

 1778. Dec. 21. [=Jones=, John Paul.] _Capt., U. S. navy._ L’Orient, [France.]
            Letter to “The Revd. John Mayhagan” [Mehegan], Brest.
            Capt. Thomas Bell may deliver this letter to him; if so,
            requests that Mehegan obtain for Bell two hogsheads of
            porter belonging to Jones but now with the King’s store; one
            is to be taken to Robert Morris, the other is for Bell and
            J[ohn] Brown. Autograph draft.

 1778. Dec. 23. [=Jones=, John Paul.] _Capt., U. S. navy._ L’Orient, [France.]
            Letter to “The Revd. Father John” [Mehegan], Brest.
            Acknowledges receipt of letter of Dec. 19th by [ ] Le Lay;
            is not “occupied either by Love or War”; to write would have
            given him some “token of existence merely not of Life”; a
            few days will “remove my doubts or realize my fears”; will
            write him the “true account”; has given Capt. [Thomas] Bell
            a letter to him respecting the delivery of his [Jones’s]
            porter; has sent to the American Commissioners the memorial
            of [British] prisoners; will do all in his power to effect
            an early exchange; [Lieut. Peter] Amiel is well and returns
            his compliments; “Present my compliments to the Bishop, and
            the _Calfateur_”; congratulates him on the safe delivery of
            the Queen [of France]; “She is a _Sweet Girl_ and deserves
            to be Happy”; requests that inventories of prize ships at
            Brest be sent to John Ross, Nantes, and [Joseph] Whitall,
            Bordeaux, in care of [John] Bonfield [Bondfield]. Autograph
            draft.

 1779. Mar. 9. [=Jones=, John Paul.] _Capt., U. S. S. “Bon Homme Richard.”_
            [L’Orient, France.] Letter to Capt. John Plaince, Cork,
            [Ireland]. Has been impossible to forward the within bill
            until now; “It is the last of the set drawn by Mr. [ ]
            Newberry”; those drawn by [Louis Daniel] Charrier are
            lost; letter [of Mar. 9, 1778] will explain everything,
            both as to “present and future Remittances from the same
            hand”; this letter “contained no Sentiment whatsoever that
            did not * * * flow directly from the Heart of the Author”;
            Miss Plaince’s answer to letter of June 1st was received
            open; “interruption of that correspondence has been owing
            to no change of Sentiment * * * and the parties are now
            and will continue real Friends.” Autograph draft.

 1779. Apr. 11. [=Jones=, John Paul.] _Capt., U. S. S. “Bon Homme Richard.”_
            L’Orient, [France.] Orders [to Lieut. Peter Amiel, Brest].
            Is to proceed to Paimboeuf to join [Matthew] Mease with
            Americans who have enlisted to serve under Jones; if wind is
            favorable is to bring them to L’Orient in vessel provided by
            [Jonathan] Williams; otherwise to come by land; hopes that
            others will join them when they know that Jones is about to
            sail for America; is then to proceed to Angoulême to the
            cannon foundry of [Louis] Sezarac L’ainé et fils; is to
            send proportions of 8 and 18 pounders to [James] Moylan;
            instructions governing his stay at Angoulême. Secretary’s
            draft.

 1779. Apr. 30. [=Jones=, John Paul.] _Capt., U. S. S. “Bon Homme Richard.”_
            L’Orient, [France.] Letter to “Revd. father John” [Mehegan,
            Brest]. Is informed by [Jonathan] Williams, his “Friend and
            Attorney”, that the American agent at Nantes [John D.
            Schweighauser] wishes a revaluation made of the Countess of
            Selkirk’s plate; has given his consent to this; thinks [ ]
            Cortentine will feel affronted at the revision of the first
            estimate; directions concerning the revaluation; requests
            that Mehegan be present; judges that Williams will forward
            [plate] to L’Orient when revalued; desires a chaplain;
            arrived from Paris a few days since; met [Lt.] Gen. [Louis
            Guillouet, Comte] d’Orvilliers “on the road”; is “this day
            so sick” that he writes in bed; wishes an early reply.

 1779. May 1–3. [=Jones=, John Paul.] _Capt., U. S. S. “Bon Homme Richard.”_
            L’Orient, [France.] Officers of auxiliary vessels under
            command of. (May 1.) _Pallas_: Denis Nicolas Cottineau de
            Kerloguen [Kloguene], Captain; Henry Ange François Le
            Meignan, Pierre François Magonet and Beninge Worle des
            Essart Mischateau, Lieutenants; François Pettibon de La
            Masc, Master; Maurice O’Connell, Capt. of Marines; Jean
            Petit, Surgeon. (May 2.) _Cerf_: Joseph Varage, Captain;
            Armand Coudre La Coudrais, Lieutenant. (May 3.) _Vengeance_:
            Philippe Nicolas Ricot, Captain; Pierre Vinet de Nantes and
            Nicolas Lejoille de St. Valery, Lieutenants; Jean Beaudot de
            Rennes en Bretagne, Master.

 1779. May 18. =Manoville=, ——, Le Chevalier de. Brest, [France.] Letter to
            Capt. John Paul Jones, [L’Orient]. Understands that he can
            obtain from Jones some Irish salted butter; if such is the
            case would like to purchase some.

 1779. Dec. 17. =O’Connell=, [Maurice.] _Capt., U. S. marines._ Rotterdam,
            [Holland.] Letter to [Capt. John Paul] Jones, The Texel.
            Regrets that he could not have seen Jones before leaving
            the Helder; considered himself too old to be under [Capt.
            Paul de] Chamillard’s orders; if he had been embarked with
            Jones, would not have left; has been taken for “the brave
            Paul Jones” in many places; as a result has been highly
            complimented; will rejoin him if needed; letters should be
            addressed to him in care of “Marquis De Brancas” [Louis
            Marie Bufile Brancas, Marquis de Lauraguais?]; wishes
            Jones would write a line to [Benjamin] Franklin in his
            behalf. Endorsed: “From Captain O’Connally * * *”

 1780. May 15. =Sarsfield=, ——, Count. [Paris.] Letter to [Capt. John Paul]
            Jones, Passy. Understands that Jones is to leave on
            Wednesday, [May 17th]; wishes an interview before that time;
            will remain at home Tuesday afternoon; would go to Passy but
            fears that they will miss each other; “will certainly call
            upon Dr. [Benjamin] Franklin Wednesday morning”; if Jones
            postpones his departure until the afternoon will be happy to
            wish him Godspeed.




                NEHEMIAH WALTER, BORN IN IRELAND, 1663.


At a meeting of the Cambridge (Mass.) Historical Society held in
Cambridge in 1906, a paper was read by William Coolidge Lane, Esq., in
which he devoted some attention to the career of Nehemiah Walter. The
matter is of so interesting a nature that we here reproduce a portion of
the paper, the title of which is “The Nehemiah Walter Elegy on Elijah
Corlet.” Walter was born in Ireland in 1663 and came to New England in
1679. Mr. Lane tells us that he became a minister highly esteemed here.

At the age of thirteen he is said to have readily conversed in Latin. He
had been apprenticed to an upholsterer in 1674, but it was found that
his tastes were altogether literary. After coming to this country, he
was at first placed under Ezekiel Cheever, the Boston schoolmaster, but
entered college almost immediately, in 1680. He was butler in 1683, and
graduated in 1684. Soon after, he made a voyage to Nova Scotia, where he
became proficient in French, but returned to study in Cambridge, and was
often employed by Corlet as his assistant. “It reflected a luster on his
character that the memorable Mr. Elijah Corlet, master of the Grammar
School in Cambridge, used to express a distinguishing value for him by
employing him to officiate at times in the care of his school when
obliged to be absent himself, always esteeming his place well supplied
by Mr. Walter, and fully confiding in his skill, prudence and
diligence.”

The Elegy was composed when he was but three years out of college, and
was still studying for the ministry in Cambridge. In 1688 he was
ordained as a colleague with John Eliot in Roxbury, Mass., then 84 years
old. His people in Roxbury, and Eliot himself, showed a deep affection
for him, and the liveliest satisfaction at having secured him for their
minister. Walter continued as the minister of the church in Roxbury up
to 1750, so that his ministry and Eliot’s together covered a period of
one hundred and eighteen years. He was for many years a member of the
corporation of Harvard College, and sided with Increase Mather, his
father-in-law. After Mather’s exclusion from the presidency, he attended
no more meetings of the corporation, and was considered to have
abdicated his office.

[Illustration:

  HON. EUGENE A. PHILBIN.

  A Regent of the University of the State of New York.

  A MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY.
]




               IRISH INFLUENCE IN THE LIFE OF BALTIMORE.


                   BY D. J. SCULLY OF BALTIMORE, MD.

It is a peculiar thing to study out fairly, even without setting down
aught except that which can be actually proved, what an important part
Irishmen have taken in shaping this Irish-named city which in the
estimation of those who do not stop to think, is deemed an “Anglo-Saxon”
community. This phrase, Anglo-Saxon, is now the thing, especially among
some educators. It is a handy phrase. It may mean something, but as
often means nothing in particular.

It is like the stuff coined at trial tables, such as “brain-storms” and
“Dementia Americana,” sufficient for the atmosphere of a courtroom, but
no where else on earth, where common sense is supposed to prevail. Hence
the delicious and unmeaning phrase, “Anglo-Saxon” this and “Anglo-Saxon”
that, as used by the educated few, to mislead the so-called uneducated
many. It is naturally a bold man who would call an Irishman an
Anglo-Saxon to his face, but the average American educationalist and
writer does not make such statements to the Gael in propria persona.

He does it at long range, and hides behind his school book and his
inkwell until the storm has passed by. The Irish who have influenced and
who have directed in many ways the past of Baltimore laid no claim to be
Anglo-Saxons and no one in their day sought to claim them as such. They
were rather proud of their Irish birth and descent and made no effort to
hide it. But it was a fact that it was no shame in those days to be
Irish, and nobody thought so, not even the English.

If it had been so awful to be Irish, no doubt the early settlers and
founders of the city would have never allowed it to be named Baltimore.
Prior to the Revolution the most important merchants and educators, and
even professional men in the town, were Irish by birth. They laid the
foundation of the town’s trade and commerce and built it up not only
morally and physically, but financially. The man who laid the foundation
of the town’s trade was Dr. John Stevenson, who, although a physician,
had an eye to trade, and coming direct from Ireland deemed it wise to
establish a line of ships between this city and Irish ports.

This was the beginning of Baltimore’s commerce, which for nearly
seventy-five years after Stevenson’s pioneer line was established,
almost rivalled New York’s commerce in general, and in many ways
excelled it. This will be refreshing news to many, but is not by any
means overdrawn. The work done by Stevenson in establishing trade for
Baltimore was continued by the Purviances, William Patterson, Bowly,
John O’Donnell, John Smith, William Smith, William McDonald, Robert and
John Oliver, Wm. Wilson, Talbott Jones, Isaac McKim, Robert Garrett,
Luke Tiernan, Cumberland Dugan, David Stewart, Stephen Stewart, James
Calhoun, John Sterrett, John McLure, Thomas Russell, Samuel Hughes,
William Neill, Hugh Young, Patrick Colvin, Alexander Pendergast, Patrick
Bennett, Robert Welsh, Mark Pringle, William Kennedy, James O. Law, Hugh
McElderry, Charles M. Dougherty, William Walters, John McCoy, D. J.
Foley, Hamilton Easter, Robert Neale, Hugh Birchhead, John Coulter, and
others, who, from time to time, have figured prominently in the shipping
and commercial annals of Baltimore.

Many of these men were not only the pioneers, but the leaders for years
in the matters which concerned the carrying trade of Baltimore and also
in the business concerns of the town and city. Their names are so
closely associated with the history of Baltimore for the first hundred
years of her history at least that it is impossible to disconnect them.
They were honest merchants of the old school and their methods were
direct and above suspicion. They laid the foundation of Baltimore’s
reputation for business honesty. Their trade was with the East and West
Indies, with South America and with Europe. Their white-winged clippers
sailed every known sea, and their house flags were known in every
country, aye, even by the savage African.

It is highly interesting to trace the rise and rule of these expatriated
Irish merchants who came to Baltimore, many of them with money and
business experience, driven from Ireland by England’s unjust tariff
laws, the same in character as those which now apply to our
“possessions,” Porto Rico and the Philippines, to “encourage” their
trade and commerce. These men hated England as strongly as they loved
fair play. They waxed rich and placed everything they had at the
services of their fellow citizens and of their country. They were well
aware of England’s hypocritical methods and thus when the Revolution
came on they cast their fortunes to a man with the colonies, and gave of
their blood, their experience and their means to assist the patriots.

During the Revolution, in Baltimore and Maryland they were prominent in
all works of importance. Thus we see Samuel Purviance, the chief man of
the town; Purviance was a leading merchant. He was chairman of the
Committee on Correspondence, a sort of Ways and Means Committee, and as
such he raised supplies for the patriotic cause and supervised methods
of defense. His services to the patriot cause were vast, and he was
frequently complimented by Washington and the Continental Congress for
his services. He was largely instrumental in helping Lafayette to clothe
his half-starved and half-clothed army when on its way to the South to
prosecute that historic campaign which ended in the surrender of
Cornwallis at Yorktown.

Thus he played a prominent part in one of the historic events in
history, and considering the present status of this republic, the most
momentous campaign in history. The Irish merchants who contributed to
this fund to buy cloth and make uniforms for Lafayette’s ragged army
were Messrs. Purviance, William Patterson, John McLure, Daniel Bowly,
Ridgely and Pringle, James Calhoun, James McHenry, Charles Carroll, Wm.
Smith, Alex. Donaldson, Samuel Hughes, Russell & Hughes, William Neill,
John Smith, William Smith, Hugh Young and Robert Patter Purviance.
William Smith and William Patterson and other Irish merchants were also
prominent in the committee work during the Revolution, and if it had
failed, would have no doubt decorated the short end of a hangman’s rope
for their love of liberty. The services of Charles Carroll of Carrollton
and of his cousin, Charles Carroll, of Mount Clare, to the patriot cause
and to the city and state, even the nation, it is needless to recount
here, as they are well known.

They were Irish-Americans, however, and not ashamed of it, and their
influence in the city and its environs were considerable along all
lines. William Patterson gave Patterson Park to the city, and also
contributed largely to the foundation of many public enterprises, some
of which survive today as monuments to the activities of himself and his
fellow Irishmen. Prime among those monuments is the Baltimore and Ohio
Railroad. Isaac McKim, another Irishman, founded the first free school
set up in Baltimore. It still stands at Baltimore and Aisquith streets a
monument to him, and has been in its day a strong sphere of influence.
John Oliver, another Gael, founded the Oliver Hibernian Free School,
which has been for nearly a century a wide center of influence for good.
It was the first school established in the United States for the
exclusive education of Irish-Americans, and was established at a time
when Americans of other races were without free schools of any kind.
Prominent in the establishment of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad and of
the Northern Central Railroad were other Irish merchants and
professional men, such as Robert Garrett, Alexander and George Brown,
the latter of whom conceived the idea of building the road; Isaac McKim,
Charles Carroll of Carrollton, John V. L. McMahon, the Irish American
lawyer, who drew that first railroad charter ever drawn for the
Baltimore and Ohio, which has served as a model ever since; Patrick
McCauley, the Irish educator; Talbott Jones, Robert Oliver and others.
These men gave not only their influence to these roads, but their money.
How well they built, facts establish. John O’Donnell, the Irishman, was
the man who named Canton, on the southeast side of the basin, because he
thought it looked like Canton, China; and he was the first president of
the Baltimore Gas Light Company. What that company has developed into
the present shows. His son, Gen. Columbus O’Donnell, was for many years
the honored president of the company.

Gen. Wm. McDonald was the first man to run packets on the Chesapeake
Bay, and also the first to run steam vessels. And thus he was the
founder of Baltimore’s great bay trade. That he was a man of influence
the conditions of the present prove. He may have builded better than he
knew, but he built greatly. Alexander Brown, Robert Garrett and Isaac
McKim were practically the founders of the banking business of this
city, and with others of the great Irish business men influenced the
financial interests of Baltimore for many years. In fact, their
descendants have a powerful influence in banking matters locally at this
time. Every one is familiar with the tremendous influence exercised in
railroad circles for many years by the Irish-American, John W. Garrett,
and his son, Robert Garrett. There can be no question about those facts.

In the religious concerns of the city the Irish have ever played an
important part. The city is the seat of the Roman Catholic church in
this country, the first bishop and archbishop of which was John Carroll,
an Irish-American. Since his day the Irish have been in the forefront in
Catholic affairs in Baltimore, and the pewholders and attendants at the
Cathedral and other Catholic churches have included many of Baltimore’s
leading citizens. St. Mary’s Seminary has educated hundreds of Catholic
priests who have gone out and labored for the salvation of souls. Of
these Levites the great and almost overwhelming majority have been
Irish-Americans.

Many of these good men have spent their lives in this city and have
proven great sources of influence for upliftment to their fellowmen. The
Irish names of the priests and bishops who have labored here in
Baltimore would make a respectable directory for information on the
municipality’s work for the betterment of men. Many will recall the
names of the saintly McColgan, Dolan, McManus, Coskery, Slattery, McCoy,
Dougherty, Malloy, Dugan, Gaitley, McDevitt, and many others of equal
note who have served prominently in this city and have been towers of
strength to their co-religionists. The stature of Archbishop Carroll in
his day was heroic, and he was regarded as one of the chief citizens of
the republic, as his famous successor, Cardinal Gibbons, is today.

The similarity between Dr. Carroll and the cardinal on the lines of
personal influence is remarkable. What Dr. Carroll was in his day a
century ago, the cardinal is today, and the person who is familiar with
the cardinal’s character knows what power and inspiration that is for
good. Other prelates who were of Irish extraction and who labored here
were Archbishops Neale and the illustrious Kenrick, the latter one of
the greatest of church writers and a strong man of his day. In other
denominations we have Dr. Patrick Allison, the first pastor of the First
Presbyterian Church, and a remarkable man in many ways, who was the
friend of Dr. Carroll, and his contemporary. Rev. John Glendy, a native
of Ireland, who was a rebel in 1798, and had to fly for his life to this
country, was the first pastor of the Second Presbyterian Church, and an
orator of unusual ability. In their day they were strong men, and
exercised an overmastering influence for good upon their flocks. Rev.
John Healey was the first Baptist minister in Baltimore town, and
founded the first Baptist chapel. He ministered here for many years and
was without doubt an influential man. The congregations of the
Presbyterian and Baptist churches included a number of prominent Irish
business and professional men, in fact the cream of the business men of
the town and city belonged to them. Hence they were widespread centers
of influence and they have so remained.

Their descendants to this day include many of Baltimore’s leading
citizens in all lines of activity. The first Methodist preacher that we
know of who preached in the vicinity of this city was Robert
Strawbridge, the Irishman. He preached about the countryside, it being
as much a felony for a Methodist preacher to preach as it was for a
Catholic priest to say mass in his day in Maryland. We know that there
were several well-known Irishmen who were among the first members of the
first M. E. church, old Light Street, now Mount Vernon Place Church;
among them being Patrick Colvin and Patrick Bennett. This Colvin
afterwards was buried from the old Light Street church, which caught
fire during his funeral, and was burned to the ground. His daughter
founded the old Colvin Institute in his honor, and Colvin Street is
named after him. He was an influential merchant as well as a leading
Methodist.

The first mayor of the city, James Calhoun, was an Irish-American. The
first secretary of the navy from Maryland was an Irishman, James
McHenry, after whom the fort is named. It is well to remark that Fort
Carroll is also named after Charles Carroll, the Irish-American. The
first secretary of state and attorney-general from Maryland was Robert
Smith, son of John Smith, the Irishman. Gen. Samuel Smith, the
Revolutionary hero, who served more years than any other from this state
in the United States Senate, also commanded the forces at the battle of
North Point and the defense of Fort McHenry. The first and only chief
justice of the United States from Maryland was Roger Brooke Taney, the
Irish-American, who was also an attorney-general of the United States.
One of the two secretaries of the navy from this state was John
Pendleton Kennedy, the Irish-American. All of these facts serve to show
that the Irish have played some part in public affairs in this city and
state.

Past and present, the Irish element has been so closely identified with
the history of Baltimore that it has played an important part in
influencing every detail of the life of the city. Deny it as some will,
the influence is still apparent in the city’s spheres, probably not so
prominently as in the long ago, but still markedly. Prosperity has
somewhat dulled the ambition of the local Gael, but that he is still in
evidence, commercially, religiously, professionally, socially and
industrially, the shallowest of investigations will prove. The readiness
of the Irishman to assimilate with other nationalities in our country
may have had something to do with the disappearance from the prominent
places which they formerly occupied of the leading families of the city
who bear the names of the splendid men who at one time led in the city’s
advance. But considerable of the wealth and the influence of the city is
still held by the descendants of these old pioneers, and by those who
have succeeded them in the life of the City of the Calverts.




                  LOOKING BACK AT OLD CAMBRIDGE, MASS.


Extract from an address by Prof. Charles Eliot Norton at a meeting of
the Cambridge (Mass.) Historical Society, October 30, 1905: “But even a
greater change than that from country village to suburban town has taken
place here in Old Cambridge in the last seventy years. The people have
changed. In my boyhood the population was practically all of New England
origin, and in large proportion Cambridge-born, and inheritors of Old
Cambridge traditions. The fruitful invasion of barbarians had not begun.
The foreign-born people could be counted up on the fingers. There was
Rule, the excellent Scotch gardener, who was not without points of
resemblance to Andrew Fairservice; there was Sweetman, the one Irish
day-laborer, faithful and intelligent, trained as a boy in one of the
‘hedge-schools’ of his native Ireland, and ready to lean on his spade
and put the troublesome schoolboy to a test on the Odes of Horace, or
even on the _Arma virumque cano_; and at the heart of the village was
the hair-cutter, Marcus Reamie, from some unknown foreign land, with his
shop full, in a boy’s eyes, of treasures, some of his own collecting,
some of them brought from distant romantic parts of the world by his
sailor son. There were doubtless other foreigners, but I do not recall
them, except a few teachers of languages in the college, of whom three
filled in these and later years an important place in the life of the
town,—Dr. Beck, Dr. Follen and Mr. Sales.”




                       A BIT OF NEW YORK HISTORY.


               Thomas F. Meehan in _N. Y. Catholic News_.

There was considerable popular opposition manifested [in New York City
in 1829 and thereabouts] to the change of the cemetery from about St.
Patrick’s to the Fifth Avenue, or Middle Road, as it was then called,
site. In the [N. Y.] _Truth Teller_ appears the following:


                        CATHOLIC BURIAL GROUND.

In giving publicity to the following communication we beg it may be
distinctly understood that we express no opinion of our own upon the
subject. The writer has left his name with the editor of this paper, and
our columns are open to any correspondent who may feel disposed to do
the same:

  “_To the Editor of the Truth Teller_:

                                              “NEW YORK, March 24, 1829.

  “SIR: The subject of procuring a suitable place for a general Catholic
  burial ground in this city has, for a long time, excited a deep
  interest among us. I beg leave, therefore, to suggest a few remarks on
  the best method to be adopted for the accomplishment of so desirable
  an object, before any definite measures are taken for a permanent
  location.

  “It appears by a hand-bill circulated a few days ago, that the
  trustees of St. Patrick’s Church, without consulting the Catholics of
  this city, have bought a tract of land opposite the Botanic Garden, a
  distance of between four and five miles from the city hall; that the
  nature of the soil is entirely unfit for the said purpose; and that
  this place has been actually appropriated by them for a general
  Catholic burial ground.

  “Query? Have the trustees of that church or any of the other Catholic
  churches in this city the right to act definitely upon this general
  subject without previously ascertaining the opinion and obtaining the
  consent of the heads of families belonging to this Catholic community?

[Illustration:

  CAPT. MARTIN L. CRIMMINS.

  Sixteenth U. S. Infantry, formerly of the Nineteenth Infantry.

  MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY.

  A Son of the Hon. John D. Crimmins, New York City.
]

  “This question ought to be fairly discussed before any final decision
  is made on the location of the contemplated cemetery; and I hope the
  columns of your widely circulated paper will be always open for the
  discussion of this point of general interest.

  “This affair, in the humble opinion of the writer, ought to be managed
  by a separate board, composed of the Right Rev. Bishop of the diocese
  and two members from each congregation, duly elected by the pewholders
  of the several Catholic churches of this city, with power to select
  the ground, the location, to make regulations, etc., etc. This
  suggestion is made with the view of ascertaining the sense of the
  Catholics of this city (who have very liberally contributed to the
  support of their several churches and charitable institutions)
  respecting this interesting question which agitates their minds.

                              “Very respectfully, your obt. serv’t,
                                                          “A SUBSCRIBER.

  “And a Catholic resident of the city of New York.”

At the meeting of the trustees on March 6, 1833, every member present
pledged himself to use his utmost endeavor “in finding and prosecuting
the invaders of the vault out of town,” which seems to indicate that the
opposition to the up-town movement had taken a very radical turn.
Previous to this, however, the idea of locating the graveyard there was
abandoned, and on August 29, 1832, a committee of five trustees
appointed to provide “a good and convenient location for a new
graveyard,” paid $37,050 to Alderman Charles Henry Hall for the block
bounded by East Eleventh and Twelfth streets, First Avenue and Avenue A.

It is related that Mr. Hall soon after repented of his bargain and
offered to pay $50,000 if the block were deeded back to him. The offer
was refused, but 100 feet in depth on three sides of the plot was sold
to lighten the debt and the rest of the land, 413x206 feet, was devoted
to cemetery purposes. Permission for the first interment was given on
March 13, 1833, and from that date until the old Eleventh Street burial
ground was officially closed in August, 1848, the total number of
interments made in its limits was 41,016. As has been stated, the
interments in St. Patrick’s graveyard, from May 25, 1813, to March,
1833, were 32,153, so that in these two old downtown graveyards in
thirty-five years, a total of 73,169 Catholics were buried. These
figures are taken from Archbishop Corrigan’s paper on “The Catholic
Cemeteries of New York” and are therefore official. The Avenue A end of
the Eleventh Street plot was originally a hollow and had to be filled in
about eighteen feet above the level at the time of its purchase.

There was a wooden fence around the property at first and this was
replaced by the iron railing that now encloses it. The high brick wall
around St. Patrick’s was put up just before the anti-Catholic excitement
of 1836 and served as a protection to the old church that largely
helped, when manned by stout defenders, to awe the mob that assembled to
plunder and destroy it. In the same year, June 5, 1836, it was
determined to rebuild St. Peter’s Church in Barclay Street. The graves
in the little space about the church were opened and most of the remains
reinterred in St. Patrick’s graveyard. Some of the pioneers were left
undisturbed and still repose under the walls of the new church built
over the old site.

The dead who sleep about the walls of old St. Patrick’s made up the very
flower of the pioneer families, mainly Irish, who built up the church in
New York. Among the long list are the first pastors and their
assistants, Fathers Michael O’Gorman, Richard Bulger, Charles Brennan
and Peter Malou—who was a general in the Belgium army and then a Jesuit.
One of his sons became a bishop in his native land—Fathers Luke Berry,
of St. Mary’s; Gregory B. Pardow, an uncle of the Jesuit of our day;
James Neale, Carberry J. Byrne, Thomas C. Levins, John N. Smith of St.
James’ and Dr. John Power, V. G. The remains of the bishops of the See,
except the first, were transferred from old St. Patrick’s to the crypt
of the Fifth Avenue Cathedral after it was opened.

The parents of Cardinal McCloskey were buried in old St. Patrick’s and
so were a son of the famous French general, Moreau, Capt. Pierre
Laudais, of the navy, who fought with Paul Jones in the Revolution;
Thomas, the father of the great lawyer, Charles O’Conor; Thomas S.
Brady, father of James T. and Judge John R. Brady; Capt. James McKeon,
of the army in 1812 and father of John McKeon; Andrew Morris, Stephen
Jumel, Dominick Lynch and his numerous children; John B. Lasala, the
Denmans, the Hargous, Binsse, Coughlan, Brandegee, De Londe, Shea,
O’Brien and other prominent old New York families.

In the Eleventh Street graveyard the 41,016 dead are of a later period,
but include many names of special local interest on the old stones, such
as the Murphy, Lynch, Carroll, Hanly, Sweeney, Bradley, Davey, McMahon,
Holahan, and other families. A local character, who died September 26,
1838, and was buried here, was an Italian named Joseph Bonfanti, who
kept what might be called the first “department store” in New York. It
was located at 297 Broadway, and it was his boast that no one could go
into his store and ask for anything in fancy articles he could not
produce for sale. He advertised in rhymes and some of the efforts in
this direction are wonderful productions. Local fame had it that he kept
poets on salary to supply his needs in this direction. His tombstone
told that he was born in Monticello, December 9, 1798, was “universally
esteemed as an affectionate husband, a kind father and a sincere
friend,” and that,—

         “Cheerful he journeyed through life’s chequered wild,
         Honest, sincere, benevolent, mild.
         As husband, father, friend, fulfilled his part,
         Affection’s smile the sunshine of his heart.”

Capt. John McMahon had a monument erected to him by the Montgomery
Guards, of whom he was commander. He was a native of Limerick, Ireland,
and died aged 37 years on April 17, 1849.

Another epitaph was as follows:

  “This tomb was erected by Rosanna, widow of John Connolly, Jr.,
  carpenter, of Gargin, parish of Killaly, County of Galway, Ireland, in
  memory of the most affectionate of husbands, who died in New York on
  the 6th day of March, 1841, aged —— years; as also her daughter Mary,
  who died on the 10th of August, 18—, aged —— months, as also her son,
  Michael, who died on the 1st of August, 1840, aged —— months.

  “This stone has been sent her by her father-in-law as a token of
  respect for her and love for his son John, her husband. May their
  souls rest in peace.

  “Dated Galway, Ireland, 1846. This stone has been sent her by her
  father-in-law, Michael Connolly.”

The stone to the memory of James, son of Denis and Winifred Hanley, who
died November 28, 1839, gave this advice:

                   “Weep not for me, my parents dear,
                   I am not dead but sleepeth here.
                   As I am now so you will be;
                   Prepare for death and follow me.”

On October 29, 1845, the Alsop farm of about 115 acres in Newtown, Long
Island, was purchased for a new place of burial, and at a special
meeting of the trustees of St. Patrick’s on July 31, 1848, it was
ordered that “the cemetery at Newtown Creek, recently consecrated in
part should be called Calvary, and placed at the disposal of the public;
that after August 2 the Eleventh Street burial ground as well as the
free vault at Fiftieth Street, should be permanently closed.” Calvary
Cemetery began to be used August 4, 1848, when the first interment, that
of Esther Ennis, was made. Subsequent purchases of land made the
territory consecrated to the burial of the dead more than 300 acres.
From August, 1848, to January, 1898, there were 644,761 interments
there.

From January, 1898, to the present, there have been about 200,000
interments, thus making in round numbers 850,000 interments in all so
far at Calvary Cemetery.




                     THE KELTS OF COLONIAL BOSTON.


                    BY THOMAS ACKLAND, BOSTON, MASS.

I am going to unfold for you a chapter of unwritten history; to tell you
in a brief way the story of the part played by men of Erin in the early
life of this city—from the time of its settlement in the year 1630 down
to the opening of the Revolution.

Historical works do not touch the narrative, Cullen’s _Story of the
Irish in Boston_ excepted. Yet even that, admirable as it is and much as
it contains, falls far short of giving a complete account. I know not
the reasons for this inexcusable neglect of historians, but I have my
opinions on the matter.

The story should have been written for two reasons at least; (1) because
the Irish were here in large numbers at the period of which I am
treating; and (2) they rendered important services to the community.

[Illustration:

  JAMES E. SULLIVAN, M. D.,

  Providence, R. I.

  A MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY.
]

This paper will develop some interesting and striking facts concerning
the early history of Boston, and to Americans of Irish blood, unless
they be students of colonial history, it would prove a revelation were
they to read it. You will see from this narrative that the Irish of
those by-gone days were not all hewers of wood and drawers of water,
despite the tremendous handicaps of racial and religious hostility and
the disproportion of the numbers in comparison to the English.

On the contrary, some of them shone as patriots and statesmen; in the
fields of art and invention; and in various ways of lesser importance
there were many whose names deserve recording in a discourse of this
nature.

Some years ago I became interested in a letter which appeared in one of
our daily papers containing a few facts about the pioneer store-keeper
of Boston—the first person to start a business here and thus earn for
himself the title of “The Father of Boston Merchants.” The reason for my
interest lay in the fact that he was an Irishman. His name was John
Cogan.

Histories of Boston and the chapters on colonial Boston in the histories
of the United States, as might be expected, both ignore the story of
John Cogan, and you would search the city in vain were you looking for a
memorial of any sort to him. Neither is there tablet nor memorial of any
sort marking the site of that humble little shop, which was the first
link of the great chain of mercantile establishments which have followed
in its wake. Historical spots of even less interest are, and properly,
suitably marked, but for some reason the site of Boston’s first place of
business has been ignored by our municipal authorities and historical
societies.

I determined to try to rescue John Cogan’s name from the practical
oblivion which enshrouded it and discover details of his career
sufficient for a newspaper or magazine article. My researches into the
musty records of the past were well rewarded and my discoveries I hope
to give the public through some reputable magazine or journal in the
near future.

It was while engaged in this long and laborious work that I discovered a
new vein, as it were, in Boston’s history, and following it up I found
much of the material which goes to make up this paper and which
suggested its preparation.

Had it been our good fortune to have had a directory containing the
names of the residents of Boston each year since its settlement we would
have found in every one of those works, with perhaps the exception of
the first two, Keltic names, and in the entire period of which I treat
some thousands of them.

Undoubtedly these statements surprise you. Naturally. Yet I could easily
make them good. And furthermore I believe it to be quite likely that if
we made a careful research among the names of the Kelts in colonial
Boston that we could easily duplicate ten per cent or more of those
borne by readers of this article.

Of the thousands of these names I have compiled I select a few for
illustration—Blake, Barrett, Boyce, Bryan, Bishop, Boyle and Burk;
Collins, Carey, Connell, Conner, Casey and Cunningham; Drury and
Downing; Flannagan; Griffin; Healy, Hart, Harkins and Hurley; Kennedy;
Lynch and Lane; Murphy, Moore, Martin, Mackey and McLean; Norton and
Neale; Power and Powell; Strain; Timmins; Welch.

The children of Erin began coming here from practically the foundation
of Boston. As Cullen says: “English of all things, it (Boston) was of
necessity anti-Irish, and classed this unfortunate people with the
heathen tribes of the forest; yet, among her earliest records appears
the distinctively Irish names of Cogan, Barry, Connors, MacCarty, Kelly;
throughout her colonial history, when the wild Irish, the Pope, the
Devil and the Pretender were classed together and hated in the lump, the
Irish were in their midst, though Irish Catholicity remained till near
the Revolution almost unrepresented.”

Yet this fact is disputed. One well known newspaper writer of Boston, an
Irishman, too, declares: “It is quite safe to say that there were no
Irish at that time (1630) among the settlers.”

Now that assertion may or may not be true. But I would say in reply to
it that if the Irish were not here as early as 1630 there was at least
one representative of the race in the colony in 1632[4] and another in
1634[5], both prominent, too, by the way, and Irish have been here ever
since.

Footnote 4:

  John Cogan, already alluded to.

Footnote 5:

  William Hibbens.

The gentleman referred to also says: “Up to that time (1647) there was
practically no infusion of Irish blood in New England.” In reply to that
I would answer that if the other large centers of New England had as
many Kelts as did Boston up to and including 1647—and I would not be
surprised if they had—this gentleman’s statement would stand disproved.

Under Cromwell’s government many Irish people were sent to New England.
On their arrival they were sold as servants or slaves by those at whose
charge they were brought here. This slavery, however, was only
temporary, and generally for a period of four years. It was distinctly
understood that this service of the Irish was to be in direct payment
for the trouble and expense of transporting them.

The men of Irish blood were not prominent in the early story of the
colony, with a few exceptions. But that was neither their fault nor to
their discredit. The reasons for this were in brief the racial antipathy
on the part of the colonists; their hatred of the religion professed by
the mass of the Kelts; the social ostracism of the English toward the
children of Erin; the legislation in Ireland which forced the natives
into, and kept them in, ignorance from an educational standpoint; their
poverty, another heritage of England’s misrule of their country and the
smallness of their numbers in comparison with the English settlers.

But time works wonders and brings its revenges! The erstwhile tiny
English and Puritan colony has become a great city, one of the greatest
in America, in fact, and the stronghold of the Catholic and Kelt. Only
the other day it was governed by a man of that faith and blood, and he
was the successor of four other mayors born in Ireland or descended from
Irish people, while the majority of the leading city officials were of
the same class.

In the professions and business life also men of Irish blood are making
a good showing here. And as to religion, our clergy of Keltic blood
outnumber those of all other nationalities and so do they all the
non-Catholic ministers combined.

I know you will be now interested to hear of John Cogan, to whom I
referred in the beginning of this paper. For a quarter of a century he
was prominently identified with the colony—from 1632 until his death in
1658. He probably came from Cork. The late John B. Reagan, of
Dorchester, noted for his historical research regarding the Irish in
America, said of the first of Boston’s Keltic citizens: “Among those who
came over in the so-called Winthrop fleet, composed of ‘people from all
parts,’ were several merchants from the maritime ports of Ireland, of
whom John Cogan was one.”

In my researches for details of Cogan’s career I found this reference to
him, from Lechford’s Notebook: “Whether John Cogan, of Boston, Mass.,
was related to this family (the Cogans of Chard, Eng.,) or not I do not
know. He appears to have been from Devonshire, as in 1639 he gave Isaac
Northcut, of Honiton, a power of attorney to receive any legacy under
the will of his mother, Eleanor Cogan, of Tiverton, in Devon.” Still,
this would not prove that Cogan was English, as thousands of Irish have
settled in England from an early period.

Cogan was virtually one of the founders of Boston, one of its leading
citizens, one of its wealthiest and most enterprising, and a pillar and
one of the founders of the First Church. And I am glad to say that the
colonists were sensible enough to so far overcome their prejudices as to
appreciate what sort of man he was, for they honored him with numerous
public offices and positions of trust.

He was a member of the first board of selectmen and served in that
capacity for a long time; a juror in the Court of Assistants; one of a
committee to allot land for the inhabitants to plant on and of another
committee to allot land on the Neck and in East Boston; one of a
committee to erect fortifications on Fort Hill and its treasurer; a
member of the grand jury; a surveyor of the highways; a constable. The
full list of offices he held would be too long to give here.

He opened the first store in 1633 or 1634. It stood on Washington Street
opposite the Old State House, on the northeast corner. Colonial records
fail to state what class of goods our pioneer store-keeper dealt in, or
how long he conducted his shop, or whether he made it a success, which I
venture to predict, in view of his career, he did.

He proved himself a shrewd and energetic business man and became wealthy
for the times in which he lived. He was the proprietor of a large amount
of real estate, including two stores and half an acre of land, which is
now covered by the store of Houghton & Dutton, and corn mills in
Charlestown and Malden.

He was one of the builders of Long wharf, the oldest in Boston and the
one with the most interesting history. He served as sergeant in that
organization of, as somebody has facetiously dubbed them, “bottle-scared
veterans,” the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company.

Among his benefactions was a gift of 70 acres to Harvard College. I
might state in passing that Cogan was one of the settlers of Dorchester,
which colony was founded in the same year as was Boston, 1630, and lived
there until his removal here in 1632.

Some few weeks ago the daily papers chronicled the death of the oldest
alumnus of Harvard College and Boston’s oldest attorney. This was
Charles A. Welch of Cohasset, Mass. Welch was the descendant of John
Welch, who was recorded in Boston as a tax-payer as early as 1682, and
who wedded Elizabeth White. The distinguished lawyer had as his great
grandfather John Welch, who served as commander of the Ancient and
Honorable Artillery Company, while the father of the lawyer was a noted
wood carver and made the famous codfish which adorns the State House and
also the great figure-head of Andrew Jackson which ornamented the bow of
the American frigate _Constitution_.

Another descendant of this John Welch of colonial Boston, and brother of
the lawyer, was Edward H. Welch, who had the happiness not only of
returning to the church of his ancestors, but also of becoming a member
of the Society of Jesus. The lawyer and priest numbered among their
cousins the present Episcopalian Bishop of Fond du Lac, the Right
Reverend Charles C. Grafton; and Mrs. Abbott, wife of the late Judge
Abbott. In a word, John Welch of colonial Boston was the progenitor of a
distinguished family.

How many of you could tell me who made the first piano-forte in America?
And the first bass-viol? And the artificial leg with joints? And the
first pack of playing cards? If you don’t know, it is not a matter of
surprise, for those achievements are not chronicled in our histories.

Well, I’ll tell you. There lived in Dorchester or Milton between the
years 1640 and 1650 a lad named Teague Crehore, who, it is said, had
been stolen from his parents in Ireland.

One of his descendants was Benjamin Crehore, who was born in Milton. He
was a remarkable genius. He it was who made the first piano-forte in
America, manufactured the first bass-viols and invented the artificial
leg with joints.

And it was Thomas Crehore, a nephew of Benjamin Crehore and the son of
William Crehore, a chair maker, and of the fifth generation of Teague
Crehore, who manufactured the first playing cards in America.

Thomas Crehore was a native of Dorchester and born in 1769. At the age
of thirty-two he bought the land on which he built his factory and
house. The industry continued there (in Milton Lower Mills, on the
Neponset River, I believe) until 1846, when the factory was burned down.
Mr. Crehore died in the same year, leaving a large estate.

The Crehores and John Cogan were not the only Kelts who were business
pioneers here in the early days. The first paper manufactured in America
was made in Dorchester and three Irishmen, while not actually starting
it, may be said to have been among the founders and promoters of the
industry (their predecessors having for only a short time conducted it).
These were Capt. James Boies, Jeremiah Smith and Hugh McLean. Cullen in
his _Story of the Irish in Boston_, says: “If to Mr. Smith belonged the
credit of being the first individual paper manufacturer, to others of
his countrymen is due the fact that the Neponset River was made by them
the basis of paper manufacturing in the North American colonies.”

Boies was born in Ireland in 1702 and died in Milton at the age of
ninety-six years. He was with General Wolfe in the battle on the Plains
of Abraham. By direction of General Washington, Captain Boies directed
the work of transporting the fagots, in which 300 teams were engaged,
that were used in fortifying Dorchester Heights, following which event
the British evacuated Boston. Boies was one of a committee of three
which drew up instructions for the representatives of the town of
Milton, wherein it was voted that the colony would support the
Continental Congress with their lives and their fortunes in the event of
hostilities with England.

Jeremiah Smith was a native of Ireland and born in 1705. At the age of
twenty-one he came to Boston and in 1737 removed to Milton. In that year
he became superintendent of a paper industry started by some men,
including Thomas Hancock, a few years before. Four years later he was
its owner. He carried on the business until 1775, when he retired, after
amassing a fortune.

Smith was an intimate friend of Governor Hutchinson and also of Governor
Hancock, at whose hospitable board the wits of the day were wont to
gather. Smith was seldom absent on such occasions, and if he were
blessed with the characteristic Keltic wit, as presumably he was, he
must have added largely to the entertainment of Hancock and his guests.

Hugh McLean, the third of the trio, was born in Ireland in 1724. He
married a daughter of Boies and while in partnership with him became
wealthy. He died in Milton at the age of seventy-five.

Col. John C. Linehan, in his work _The Irish Scots and the
“Scotch-Irish,”_ says: “Massachusetts had received, before the
Revolution, a fair proportion of the Irish, for which the race has
received but little credit. * * * The chronicles of the town of Boston,
Mass., are full of enactments to keep the Irish out, but it was found to
be impossible. They would come despite the prejudice, for Massachusetts
was the most progressive of the colonies, and these people, or many of
them, being artisans, spinners, weavers, shoemakers, ropemakers, etc.,
their labor became welcome, and a compromise was made by obliging those
of them who were well-to-do to furnish bonds for their poorer countrymen
and women, to the end that they would not become public charges.”

And again: “As early as 1780 and 1790 John Sullivan, Patrick Connor and
Michael Carney were associated in the manufacture of paper at
Dorchester, Mass.”

Properly speaking, I should not quote this statement in my paper, as the
dates mentioned are later than the limit of time with which my subject
treats; but I deemed it fitting to do so as being supplementary to those
facts given about the other three Kelts engaged in the business.

Among the chaplains of the French fleet which assisted the Americans in
the Revolution was Abbe Robin. He wrote a series of letters to a friend
describing his travels in this country; the first, dated in Boston,
contained this paragraph:

“The Irish Presbyterians, discontented with their landlord at home and
attracted by similarity of sentiment, have established in this place,
with some success, manufactories of linen, and have made some attempts
at broadcloths; those that have been lately manufactured are close and
well woven, but hard and coarse; their hat manufactories have succeeded
not better than the cloths; they are thick, spongy and without firmness,
and come far short of the beauty and solidity of ours.”

Now it is fair to infer that these industries were not started since the
beginning of the Revolution. Those things are not done in war-times for
very obvious reasons. That they had been in operation for some years may
be taken for granted.

And now here is evidence showing that one of these industries was
started a long time previous to the date of the Abbe’s letter. The
_American Cyclopedia_ says: “Some of the Scotch-Irish settlers in Boston
in 1720 introduced the linen manufacture, which exercised much interest
and was greatly encouraged, spinning-schools being established.” I
didn’t know until I read this paragraph that there was such an
individual as a “Scotch-Irishman” in Boston in the early days. The
writers of the records never found one; or if they did, failed to
recognize him.

Now a word as to the alleged “Scotch-Irish” of early times in Boston:
Thomas Hamilton Murray, secretary of the American-Irish Historical
Society, says on the subject:

“The Massachusetts colonial records repeatedly mention the ‘Irish,’ not
the Scotch-Irish. Cotton Mather in a sermon in 1700 says: ‘At length it
was proposed that a colony of Irish be sent over to check the growth of
this countrey.’ No prefix there * * *

“Cullen describes the arrival at Boston in 1717 of Captain Robert Temple
‘with a number of Irish Protestants.’ Captain Temple was, in 1740,
elected to the Charitable Irish Society. In another place Cullen alludes
to ‘the Irish spinners and weavers who landed in Boston in the early
part of the eighteenth century.’”

One of the early citizens of Boston was William Hibbens, of Ireland, who
came here in 1634. Like his countryman, John Cogan, he became prominent
and wealthy. He was referred to in the colonial records as a gentleman.
He served for a long time on the board of selectmen; as magistrate,
agent of the colony in England, treasurer of the town stock; deputy to
the General Court; highway surveyor; member of the commission to fortify
Castle Island, and in other offices also labored for the interests of
his townsmen.

Hibbens wedded Mrs. Ann Moore, a widow, and sister of Governor
Bellingham. He died in 1654. Mrs. Hibbens was hung for alleged
witchcraft two years later. She left her property to her two sons, John
and Joseph Moore, of Ballyhorick, County Cork, Ire.

John Casey of Muddy River, as the now aristocratic town of Brookline was
called in early days, was a participant in that conflict with the
Indians known as King Philip’s War, fought in 1675–6. He took part in
the attack on the Red Men’s fort in the Great Swamp in Rhode Island and
was wounded in the engagement.

[Illustration:

  BRIG.-GEN. JOHN R. McGINNESS, U.S.A. (Retired.).

  Norfolk. Va.
]

The name Collins is found frequently in the early records. Edward
Collins was a resident of Cambridge as early as 1646. He was a merchant.
Christopher Collins, a shoemaker, lived in Dedham as early as 1645.
William Collins was in Boston as early as 1646. He was the New England
agent of Mathew Craddock of London, a merchant. John Collins became a
“freeman” in 1646. Timothy Collins, a servant, was brought to Boston in
1764 on a schooner which came from Halifax and Cork. Four years later
came a lad set down in the records as William Collen, brought here on a
sloop from Windsor.

Ann Collins, a servant, arrived here from Ireland in 1767. Captain
Palfrey Collins came into port in 1768. Clement Collins was one of a
number of citizens who lodged their arms with the selectmen in 1774. He
gave up a gun and a blunderbuss. Joseph Collins, on January 1, 1775, was
nominated a watchman. In the company of which Captain Allen was
commander in 1698 was Mathew Collins. In a public school kept here by
Samuel Holyoke, Daniel Collins was a pupil in 1753. Thomas Collins, a
farmer, came here in 1765 on a sloop from Fort Cumberland. John Collins
was a constable in 1657. Henry Collins was made a freeman in 1636–7 and
Edward Collins in 1640.

Healy was another name of which I find mention on numerous occasions in
colonial days. William Healy, who was here as early as 1645, figured in
a number of real estate transactions and had business dealings with
Governor Dudley.

One of the leading Keltic families of colonial Boston was the McCarthys.
Thaddeus McCarthy was here as early as 1666. He was an officer of the
town in 1674 and a member of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company
in 1681.

One of his sons, if I mistake not, was Florence McCarthy, who became one
of the leading citizens of the town, a man of wealth and a successful
dealer in provisions. He was one of the founders of the first Episcopal
church in New England. He was here as early as 1686 and died in 1712. He
left an estate valued at £2,922, including his farm, which embraced the
land in Roxbury on which the Marcella Street Home stood.

Another son was Captain William McCarthy, who was the best known
ship-owner in the town. Still another was Thomas McCarthy. He was chosen
a constable in 1727, but was not anxious to serve in that capacity. A
fourth son was Thaddeus McCarthy, who was graduated from Harvard
College, was pastor of the First Church in Worcester for thirty-seven
years and became the father of fifteen children.

A brother of this Thaddeus McCarthy, the minister, was Captain William
McCarthy, who served as quartermaster of the Fifteenth Massachusetts
Regiment in the Revolution, and a son was Dr. Thaddeus McCarthy, who
became a noted medical practitioner in Fitchburg, Mass., and Keene, N.
H. A Charles Maccarty took part in the expedition against Quebec in 1690
and was badly wounded.

I will not vouch positively that I have stated accurately the relations
to one another of these Maccarthys. There is a little difference in one
or two statements in this matter by at least two good authorities,
Bernard Cullen, author of _The Story of the Irish in Boston_, and the
late Col. John C. Linehan of Concord, N. H., author of numerous articles
on the early Irish residents of New England.

Now I am going to give you a few tid-bits, as it were, from the colonial
records and other sources:

“Derman Mahoone is fined 20 shillings for intertaining two Irishwomen”
in 1657. In other words, he simply gave them the hospitality of his home
in a legitimate way. But that was against the law—for the Irish.

“Margaret Noriss, an Irishwoman is admitted to the town.” That was in
1658.

John Martin, a ship carpenter, was a resident in 1637 and was admitted
an inhabitant in the following year.

John Moore was the servant of the governor in 1639.

Myles Tarne, a leather dresser, was here as early as 1642.

From the records of 1646 I quote: “John Berry is put an apprentice to
Edward Keyly for seaven years.” Berry, undoubtedly, is a corruption of
Barry, and Keyly of Kelly or Kiley.

I hardly need to remind you, in mentioning this, that the spelling of
the keepers of the colonial records was something atrocious. William
Healy, to whom I referred a moment ago, had his name spelled in at least
five different ways.

James Carey was chosen town clerk of Charlestown in 1662.

A great fire occurred in Boston in 1760. Among those whose homes were
destroyed were Captain Killeran and Michael Carroll. They lived in the
district which we used to know as Fort Hill.

In 1659 Governor Endicott united in marriage John Morrell and Lysbell
Morrell, both Irish, say the records.

James Cochran, an Irish boy, was captured by Indians in those early
days. He was a brave youth and managed to kill a couple of savages and
make his escape. _The Boston News-Letter_ of April 29, 1725, said of
him: “James Cochran, ye youth that came into Brunswick with two scalps,
came into town on Monday last and on Tuesday produced ye same scalps
before ye Honorable Lieutenant-Governor and Council, for which he
received a reward of two hundred pounds. And for ye farther
encouragement of young men and others to perform bold and hardy actions
in ye Indian war, His Honor ye Lieutenant Governor has been pleased to
make him sargeant in ye forces.”

Verily, a good type of the Fighting Race!

Now to come down to the second half of the period of time which I am
considering. One of the most picturesque and interesting figures in the
history of Boston was John Hancock, whom, some claim, had Irish blood in
his veins. He was a staunch patriot, statesman, leader in public
affairs, governor of the Commonwealth, orator and the first signer of
the Declaration of Independence (which, by the way, with only his
signature as president of the Continental Congress and that of Charles
Thomson, a native of Maghera, Ire., as secretary, was sent forth to the
world, the other names being added to it later).

As a bit of evidence which may help to indicate Hancock’s ancestry, it
may be worth mentioning that he presented a bell and vane to the Irish
Presbyterian Church in Boston.

A copy of _The Tyrone, Ireland, Constitution_, issued some time in or
prior to 1876, contained these statements: “Those who are conversant
with _Reid’s History of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland_ are aware
that multitudes of Protestants left Ulster for the plantations of North
America. John Hancock’s ancestor was among that number.”

And again: “It is stated by reliable authorities that the ancestors of
John Hancock emigrated from near Downpatrick, Co. Down, Ire., and
settled in Boston toward the close of the seventeenth century. The
Hancocks have been for centuries actively and largely engaged in the
foreign and domestic trade of Newry, and it was, doubtless, in a
commercial capacity that the first of the name came to Boston. The
family to which President Hancock belonged is, it is said, now (1889)
represented in Ireland by John Hancock of Lurgan, and by Neilson
Hancock, the founder of the Irish Statistical Society. Anthony Hancock,
who came from Ireland, resided in Boston in 1681, and he was evidently
the founder of the family in America.”

Equal to Hancock in patriotism and brilliant qualities was James
Sullivan, who spent the last part of his life in Boston. He was a
governor of Massachusetts, patriot, jurist, orator and author and shone
conspicuously in his various roles. He was a brother of General John
Sullivan, New Hampshire’s most distinguished Kelt, patriot, the soldier
who struck the first blow for the freedom of his country, delegate to
the Continental Congress, jurist and chief magistrate of the Granite
State.

These two great men were the sons of Owen Sullivan or O’Sullivan, who
came from Ardea, Co. Kerry, while their mother was from Cork.

The year 1737 was notable in the annals of Boston as marking the birth
of a lad who was destined, up to the present time, to become her
greatest artist, “the American Vandyke,” as he was fittingly called. He
was a painter of portraits and historical subjects, and doubtless many
of you have seen some of the splendid works from his brush which enrich
the Museum of Fine Arts. I refer to John Singleton Copley. He was the
son of Irish parents (they were from County Clare), who settled in
Boston in 1736.

Copley began his career under great disadvantages—without teacher or
instruction, without model, without materials to practise. He even had
to make his own palette and arrange what colors he used. Furthermore, he
never saw a good picture until he left his native land. But
notwithstanding all this, his genius triumphed.

When twenty-three years old, Copley sent, without name or address, an
exquisite portrait of his half-brother, entitled “The Boy and the Flying
Squirrel,” to Benjamin West, the famous English painter, requesting that
it be placed in the exhibition rooms of the Royal Academy in London.
Though it was contrary to the rules of that institution to give such an
honor to the work of unknown artists, this product of the young American
Kelt was placed there because of its merits and through West’s
influence. West himself made this comment on the painting: “What
delicious coloring! It is worthy of Titian himself!”

Copley spent the latter part of his life in London, and after achieving
the most brilliant success and receiving high honors, died in 1815.

Some of his biographers assert that Copley left America because of
royalist tendencies, but this is untrue. He did so simply to perfect
himself in his art. As a matter of fact, his sympathies and judgment
were enlisted with his countrymen in their struggle for independence, as
passages in his own and friends’ correspondence conclusively prove.

Among the Massachusetts men who signed the Declaration of Independence
was Robert Treat Paine of Boston. Paine, according to what is believed
to be good authorities, had Irish blood in his veins. He was the
grandson of Robert Paine, who came here about the year 1698. This Robert
Paine was a brother of Henry O’Neill of Dungannon, Co. Tyrone, a
descendant of Shane the Proud, Prince of Ulster, and cousin of Sir Neal
O’Neill, who perished in the Battle of the Boyne. Henry O’Neill changed
his name to Paine, which had been borne by a parental ancestor, in order
to preserve part of his estates. So says O’Hart, compiler of _Irish
Pedigrees_.

Robert Treat Paine, signer of the Declaration of Independence, was born
in Boston in 1731. He became a lawyer and conducted the prosecution of
the English soldiers who perpetrated the “Boston Massacre,” as it is
called. He served in the legislature and was a delegate to the
Continental Congress from 1774 to 1778. When the State Constitution of
Massachusetts was adopted in 1780 he was made attorney-general and
served as such for six years, then becoming a judge of the Supreme
Court.

Two of his descendants and namesakes are today prominent citizens of
Boston, one a successful business man, while the other, his son, a few
years ago was the candidate for governor on the Democratic ticket.

The first indication of the Irish in Boston giving any evidence of
national spirit occurred in 1737, on St. Patrick’s Day, when twenty-six
Protestant Kelts—they all belonged to the Irish Presbyterian
Church—organized the Charitable Irish Society to aid unfortunate fellow
countrymen and to cultivate a spirit of unity and harmony among all
Irishmen in the Massachusetts colony and their descendants and to
advance their interests socially and morally. It has held meetings and
celebrations from that day down to the present, except during the
Revolution, in which a number of members took part. It has the
distinction of being the oldest Irish society in America. Some of the
charter members were the founders of distinguished families.

One of the founders was Peter Pelham, stepfather of Copley, the artist.
He was an engraver, painter and father of fine arts. The same year the
society was founded the selectmen granted him permission to open a
school for the education of children in reading, writing, needle-work,
dancing and the art of painting on glass, etc.

Major-General Henry Knox, that brilliant and dashing soldier of the
Revolution, and secretary of war, was also a member, as were his father
and two uncles. General Knox was born in Boston in 1760.

The membership roll also contained the names of Capt. Robert Gardner, a
wealthy and prominent citizen; Rev. John Moorehead, pastor of the Irish
Presbyterian Church; William Hall, who was the first president of the
Society and was a constable in 1730; John McLean, a slater, and who made
repairs on Faneuil Hall; Captain James McGee, who had command of a
vessel in the service of the commonwealth of Massachusetts Bay and which
was wrecked during a great storm in 1778, when seventy-two of the crew
perished; and William Moroney. The diary of Lieutenant Burton, published
in the Revolutionary rolls of New Hampshire, mentions the appointment by
Washington of Mr. Moroney as provost marshal of the army.

Among the soldiers serving in the Revolution was the son of Mr. Greaton,
who kept the Greyhound Tavern in Roxbury. That boy became known to fame
as General John Greaton. He belonged to the first company of minute men
raised in America in 1775, and was chosen major, lieutenant-colonel and
colonel of Heath’s regiment. After the battle of Lexington he was
engaged in the skirmishes about Boston until he joined that memorable
excursion to Quebec. He served throughout our struggle for independence
and was one of Washington’s most trusted officers.

William Connolly was another Boston Kelt who fought in the Revolution.
And so was Michael Cassady. Cassady was one of the patriots at Valley
Forge.

Among the residents of Milton in colonial days was Anthony Gulliver, who
was born in Ireland in 1619. He was the ancestor of a large number of
able and influential men and women who have been prominent in public and
religious affairs of Milton, Mass., for nearly two centuries.

_The Story of the Irish in Boston_ contains the following interesting
paragraph about a member of the Gulliver family:

“Capt. Lemuel Gulliver, who once lived at Algerine Corner, returned to
Ireland in 1723 and gave a glowing description of the American country
to his neighbor, Jonathan Swift. Lemuel’s imagination was vivid and
fanciful and he turned it to a quaint account in this instance.

“He declared to Swift that ‘the frogs were as tall as his knees and had
musical voices that were guitar-like in their tones; the mosquitoes’
bills were as long as darning needles’; and from these exaggerated and
fabulous accounts of the country the great Swift conceived and wrote the
famous _Gulliver’s Travels_, which was published in 1726, displaying a
unique union of misanthropy, satire, irony, ingenuity and humor.”




                   CONCERNING “AN IRISH MAN-OF-WAR.”


Further information is wanted regarding the following incident mentioned
in _Winthrop’s History of New England_: “A ship from the Colonies,
carrying fourteen guns * * * on a voyage to the Canaries about the close
of the year 1644, fought nearly all day at close quarters, and finally
beat off an Irish man-of-war of superior force.” Additional details on
this subject would be of great interest.




                       THEY FIRED THREE VOLLEYS.


In connection with a celebration of St. Patrick’s Day in Baltimore, Md.,
in 1798, it is noted that “at eleven o’clock Captain Stewart’s Irish
brigade and Keating’s Irish grenadiers, accompanied by a detachment of
Captain Weaver’s artillery, with two pieces of cannon, marched to
Federal Hill and fired three volleys in honor of the day.”




                     AN EARLY DOUGHERTY MENTIONED.


The Boston _Evening Transcript_ recently had the following: “Dougherty.
Lieutenant Charles Dougherty removed to Framingham from Brookfield about
1765. When was he born and who were his parents? Was he son of Jane
Dougherty, widow, whose will of 1763 mentions sons: Charles and Micah,
and daughters: Elenor Patterson, Rebecca Getchell and Elizabeth Kendall?
Any facts concerning early Massachusetts Doughertys will be
appreciated.”




                 LIEUT. JOHN MICHAEL O’CONOR, U. S. A.


Hon. John D. Crimmins of New York City, in one of his books speaks of
John Michael O’Conor. The latter was a native of New York; lieutenant in
the Third U. S. Artillery, 1812; later, regimental quartermaster; was
made captain in the spring of 1813; June 20, 1814, he was appointed
assistant adjutant-general under Gardner, on Gen. Brown’s staff, and
held the rank at the time of the battle of Chippewa, in which he
participated. He left the army in 1821. He translated, in 1824, for the
U. S. Military Academy at West Point, Guy de Vernon’s _Science of War
and Fortifications_.




                      A SOLDIER OF THE REVOLUTION.


The society some time ago received an interesting letter of inquiry from
Mrs. M. A. Mulcahy, residing at Jack’s Reef, Onondaga County, New York.
She wrote concerning a granduncle, who served in the Revolution. His
name was Flynn, and he came from the County Galway in Ireland. Dying, he
left a will depositing certain money in the United States treasury. The
heirs never received any of it. Mrs. Mulcahy wished to ascertain the
proper steps to take to recover the same.

[Illustration:

  JAMES A. O’GORMAN.

  New York City.

  A JUSTICE OF THE NEW YORK SUPREME COURT.
]




                       THE BATTLE OF NEW ORLEANS.


             BY HON. A. L. MORRISON, SANTA FE, NEW MEXICO.

As Monday will be the anniversary of New Orleans, I thought I would send
you the inclosed letter from General Jackson [who was of Irish
parentage], which will help you to celebrate the great event. The
introduction is somewhat mutilated, but you can get enough from it to
serve as an introduction to the letter. A number of years ago I visited
New Orleans, and I need not tell you that one of my most pleasant
recollections of the visit was inspecting the field where 1,500 Kentucky
and Tennessee riflemen killed or wounded 2,117 of England’s choicest
troops, including their commander, General Pakenham, who was
brother-in-law of the Iron Duke.

I saw while on the field an unfinished monument in honor of the brave
men who won the battle. I made all the inquiries possible about the
monument (which I regarded as a monument of ingratitude), but could find
no one who could give me any information concerning it. I even wrote to
the _Picayune_ suggesting that as the exposition to celebrate the
Louisiana Purchase was about to be held, the event would be a good
opportunity to raise the funds necessary to finish the monument, but
nothing was done and it still remains as a reproach to the last
generation as well as to this.

Of course you know that the treaty of Ghent was signed on Christmas Day,
1814, so it was three weeks after that that the battle was fought; but
it came in time to redeem the series of blunders that characterized the
so-called campaign on the Canadian frontier. In this connection permit
me to say that the house we live in was bought from a gentleman whose
two grandfathers were present at the battle. I knew a man when I was a
boy who fought on the British side, and also fought on the fatal field
of Waterloo, in the Twenty-seventh Inniskillen Foot.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Following are the excerpts from General Jackson’s letter to which Mr.
Morrison alludes above:

“The battle (says General Jackson) commenced at a very little before 7
a. m., January 8, 1815, and as far as the infantry was concerned it was
over by 9 a. m. My force was very much mixed. I had portions of the 7th
and 44th regular infantry regiments, Kentucky and Tennessee riflemen,
Creoles, United States marines and sailors, Baratarian men—one of them,
Captain Dominique You, commanded part of my artillery (and a famous
gunner he was)—and two battalions of free negroes. I had in the action
about 6,000 men. The British strength was almost the same as mine, but
vastly superior in drill and discipline. Of their force my riflemen
killed and wounded 2,117 in less than an hour, including two general
officers (both died on the field, each a division commander), seven full
colonels, with seventy-five line and staff officers. I lost six killed
and seven wounded.

“As to tactics, there were very little in use on either side. We had
some works of earth fronting the river, but the Kentucky and Tennessee
riflemen, who sustained the main attack, had protected themselves by a
work about two feet and a half high, made of logs placed two feet apart,
and the space between filled in with earth. This work began at the
Mississippi River, and ended in the swamp, being at a right angle with
the river.

“Thinking this the weakest portion of our line, and seeing ununiformed
men behind the trifling defenses, General Pakenham thought it the best
thing to begin his attack by carrying this part of my line with the
bayonet. On the 3d of January I had ordered that each rifleman’s
powder-horn be filled, and enough lead for 100 bullets issued, besides
good material for bullet-patching be furnished. This order required
every soldier to thoroughly clean his rifle and put a new flint into the
hammer; so we were ready as we could be for the attack.

“There was a very heavy fog on the river that morning, and the British
had formed and were moving before I knew it. The disposition of the
riflemen was very simple. They were told off in numbers one and two.
Number one was to fire first, then step back and let number two shoot
while he reloaded. About six hundred yards from the riflemen there was a
great drainage canal running back from the Mississippi River to the
swamp in the rear of the tilled land on which we were operating. Along
this canal the British formed under the fire of the few artillery pieces
I had, near enough to them to get their range. But the instant I saw
them I said to Coffee, whom I directed to hurry to his line, which was
to be first attacked: ‘By ——, we have got them; they are ours!’ Coffee
dashed forward, and riding along his line, called out, ‘Don’t shoot till
you can see their belt-buckles.’ The British were formed in mass, well
closed up, and about two companies front.

“The British, thus formed, moved on at a quick step, without firing a
shot, to within one hundred yards of the kneeling riflemen, who were
holding their fire till they could see the belt-buckles of their
enemies. The British advance was executed as though they had been on
parade. They marched shoulder to shoulder, with the step of veterans, as
they were. At one hundred yards’ distance from our line the order was
given, ‘Extend column front. Double quick, march! Charge!’ With bayonets
at the charge, they came on us at a run. I own it was an anxious moment;
I well knew the charging column was made up of the picked troops of the
British army. They had been trained by the duke himself, were commanded
by his brother-in-law, and had successfully held off the ablest of
Napoleon’s marshals in the Spanish campaign. My riflemen had never seen
such an attack, nor had they ever before fought white men. The morning,
too, was damp; their powder might not burn well. ‘God help us!’ I
muttered, watching the rapidly advancing line. Seventy, sixty, fifty,
finally forty yards were they from the silent kneeling riflemen.

“All of my men I could see was their long rifles rested on the logs
before them. They obeyed their orders well; not a shot was fired until
the redcoats were within forty yards. I heard Coffee’s voice as he
roared out: ‘Now, men, aim for the center of the cross-belts! Fire!’ A
second after the order a crackling, blazing flash ran all along our
line. The smoke hung so heavily in the misty morning air that I could
not see what had happened. I called Tom Overton and Abner Duncan, of my
staff, and we galloped towards Coffee’s line. In a few seconds after the
first fire there came another sharp, ringing volley. As I came within
one hundred and fifty yards of Coffee, the smoke lifted enough for me to
make out what was happening. The British were falling back in a
confused, disorderly mass, and the entire first ranks of their column
were blown away. For two hundred yards in our front the ground was
covered with a mass of writhing wounded, dead and dying redcoats.

“By the time the rifles were wiped the British line was reformed, and on
it came again. This time they were led by General Pakenham in person,
gallantly mounted, and riding as though he was on parade. Just before he
got within range of Coffee’s line, I heard a single rifle-shot from a
group of country carts we had been using, about one hundred and
seventy-five yards distant, and a moment thereafter I saw Pakenham reel
and pitch out of his saddle. I have always believed he fell from the
bullet of a free man of color, who was a famous rifle-shot, and came
from the Atakappas region of Louisiana. The second advance was precisely
like the first in its ending. In five volleys the 1,500 or more riflemen
killed and wounded 2,117 British soldiers, two thirds of them killed
dead or mortally wounded. I did not know where General Pakenham was
lying, or I should have sent to him, or gone in person, to offer any
service in my power to render.

“I was told he lived two hours after he was hit. His wound was directly
through the liver and bowels. General Keene, I hear, was killed dead.
They sent a flag to me, asking leave to gather up their wounded and bury
their dead, which, of course, I granted. I was told by a wounded officer
that the rank and file absolutely refused to make a third charge. ‘We
have no chance with such shooting as these Americans do,’ they said.”

Commenting on the letter, and after referring to Napoleon’s expressions
of admiration for the American leader’s action at New Orleans, William
Hugh Roberts, the noted writer, said:

“This concludes the material part of General Jackson’s letter. It was in
the feverish glories of the Hundred Days that Napoleon came into
possession of Mr. Monroe’s translation. There was no doubt about the
facts. There happened to be abroad then in France two or three American
gentlemen who were accustomed to the use of the rifle. One of them
selected a weapon out of the four sent from America to the French
emperor, and in Napoleon’s presence did some really excellent
sharpshooting at one hundred yards.

“Had Napoleon won Waterloo, it is possible that he would have organized
a corps of sharpshooters and armed them with the American rifle, which
was capable of a more deadly accuracy than any European arm of the kind,
not excepting even the rifle of Switzerland. General Jackson repeated
the compliment of Napoleon to the typical American weapon to General
William Selby Harney, then a field officer of dragoons, who in turn
related the incident to the writer.”




                       ANENT THE SHANNON FAMILY.


Eleanor Lexington, in the _Buffalo Sunday News_, states that Nathaniel
Shannon, who was born in Ireland 1655, came to this country when he was
thirty-two years old and made his home in Boston, where in 1701 he was a
member of the Old South Church. Twenty-two years later he died, and the
stone marking his grave in the Old Granary Burying Ground in Boston is
still standing. Nathaniel’s brother, Robert, was mayor of Derry in 1689,
and Nathaniel was also a man of affairs, holding many town offices. He
was the first naval officer of the port of Boston and a merchant of
prominence.

The papers now preserved in the Massachusetts State Archives show that
he was a man of good education. His wife was Elizabeth, and their
children were Nathaniel J., Robert, who is supposed to have died
unmarried, and Samuel, who married Ann Miller. Nathaniel the second
married Abigail Vaughan, whose father was one of the royal councillors
and also chief justice of New Hampshire. Nathaniel and Abigail had two
sons, Nathaniel and Cutts. The four children of Nathaniel were his
namesake, and George, Margaret and Abigail. Nathaniel and his wife,
Abigail Vaughan, lived in Portsmouth, N. H., where he was a ship
merchant. He also lived in Ipswich. Among other records of this
generation, still extant, is that of a deed conveying land to Jonathan
Belcher, 1720. Nathaniel was a slave owner, and, by will, left negroes
to his sons.

We find that Dover, N. H., was another stronghold of the Shannons, and
Thomas, who married Lilias Watson, held many town offices. In 1785 he
was captain of the New Hampshire militia. “He was a zealous supporter of
the Revolution and active in recruiting its armies.” He died in 1800,
aged about fifty years. Heitman’s _Officers of the American Revolution_
names William Shannon of Virginia, ensign and lieutenant. O’Seanchain is
said to have been the first form of the surname, Shannon. From
O’Seanchain to Shanahan, Shanason, is considered an easy feat to
accomplish by those who are skilled in such matters. Then from Shanahan
to Shanon or Shannon is as easy as rolling off the proverbial log.
Seanchain or Seanchan is composed of two Celtic words, “seancha,”
meaning an antiquarian or genealogist, and “an,” one who. Seanchan is,
then, one who is an antiquarian. Old records frequently give the name as
Shanon, or with one “n.” The O’Sheanchains have a long pedigree,
belonging, as they do, to that branch of the Celtic race which alone of
all European races of the period antedating the Christian era has
maintained its identity to the present time.

[Illustration:

  MR. THOMAS J. LYNCH.
  Augusta, Me.
]

[Illustration:

  MR. GEORGE W. McCARTHY.
  Portsmouth, N. H.
]

[Illustration:

  MR. ROGER G. SULLIVAN.
  Manchester, N. H.
]

                     THREE MEMBERS OF THE SOCIETY.




                          REVIEW OF THE YEAR.


  LEADING EVENTS IN THE CAREER OF THE SOCIETY FOR 1907, OR OF SPECIAL
                        INTEREST TO THE MEMBERS.

 January.   Hon. James H. Higgins, mayor of Pawtucket, is this month
              inaugurated governor of Rhode Island. Hon. Patrick J.
              McCarthy is inaugurated mayor of Providence, R. I.

            It is stated that the Rev. Joshua P. L. Bodfish, for the
              past twenty years rector of St. John’s Church, Canton,
              Mass., celebrates his seventieth year by resigning his
              pastorate, with the permission of Archbishop O’Connell.
              Father Bodfish purposes to devote the rest of his life
              to literary and charitable work. He is a member of the
              American-Irish Historical Society, comes of old Puritan
              stock, and is a veteran of the Civil War.

 Jan. 3.    Gunner Cornelius Cronin (U. S. N.) retired, has been
              promoted to be a chief gunner on the retired list to rank
              with, but after, ensign, from June 29, 1906, in accordance
              with the provisions of the naval appropriation act
              approved on that date.

 Jan. 3.    Chief Boatswain J. S. Croghan is by naval orders detached
              from the _Franklin_ and ordered to command the _Wasp_.
              Boatswain J. Clancy is detached from the _Franklin_ and
              ordered to the _Wasp_.

 Jan. 8.    Capt. D. P. Foley of the revenue cutter service is a member
              of the board which is announced to meet at Baltimore, Md.,
              today, to consider applications.

 Jan. 11.   Julius L. Foy, a St. Louis (Mo.) member of the society,
              dies.

 Jan. 24.   Col. John Y. F. Blake, who led an Irish corps against the
              British army in the Boer War, was found dead today in his
              home, New York City, from gas asphyxiation. His death is
              believed to have been the result of accident, as there was
              no evidence of self destruction. Colonel Blake had served
              a long period in the United States army.

 Jan. 24.   Annual meeting and dinner of the Society. It was held at the
              Hotel Brunswick, Boston, Mass. Thomas B. Fitzpatrick of
              Boston presides.

 February.  This month appears the statement: Colonel Paul St. C.
              Murphy, a Brooklyn man, has assumed command of the Marine
              Corps stationed at the Brooklyn Navy Yard. Colonel Murphy
              succeeds Lieutenant-Colonel Mahoney, who has been assigned
              to the Marine Corps in the Philippine Islands. Colonel
              Mahoney has been in command of the local barracks for
              nearly two years.

 Feb. 2.    Death of Rt. Rev. William Stang, D. D., Roman Catholic
              bishop of Fall River, Mass. Bishop Stang was a member of
              the Society.

 Feb. 9.    Death in New Bedford, Mass., of John B. Sullivan, a member
              of the Society.

 Feb. 21.   Hon. John Cunneen, former attorney-general of New York
              state, dies at his home in Buffalo.

 March.     Mrs. Robert Gould Shaw of Boston, Mass., widow of Colonel
              Shaw, died this month. She was a daughter of Ogden
              Haggerty of New York.

            At the sale of the Doherty estate, New York City, Stephen
              McPartland, of McPartland & O’Flaherty, paid $382,550 for
              a plot 100x100, at the southwest corner of 8th Avenue and
              43d Street. This was at the rate of over $38 per square
              foot.

 March.     Brigadier-General Richard Comba (U. S. A.), retired, died
              in the Presidio, San Francisco, of heart disease. He was
              seventy years old. He was placed on the retired list when
              he reached the age limit, after a service of forty-six
              years. Few officers in the army saw more active service
              than General Comba. Born in County Limerick, Ireland,
              he entered the army as a private in 1855, when eighteen
              years old. For eight years he served as a private and
              a non-commissioned officer, and received his first
              commission as second lieutenant in 1863. He served with
              distinction through the Civil War, and was brevetted for
              gallantry at Gettysburg. At the close of the war he
              remained in the army, and served during many Indian
              campaigns, the promotions coming slowly. He was in command
              of the Twelfth Infantry in the Santiago campaign, and
              was later brigadier-general of volunteers. He served in
              the Philippines, in command of the Fifth Infantry, and
              until he retired was in command of the Province of Arba,
              Northern Luzon. General Comba came of good old Gaelic
              stock (the family being that of a branch of the O’Sullivan
              clan).

 March 5.   James S. Haley is re-elected mayor of Montpelier, Vt. James
              W. Ryan is chosen mayor of Vergennes, Vt.

 March 15.  Judge Thomas Maloney, who was private secretary to President
              Andrew Johnson, died on this date at Ogden, Utah, where he
              had lived for many years.

 March 16.  Statue in Philadelphia to Commodore John Barry is unveiled
              today. The exercises were of a very impressive character.

 March 18.  Vice-President Fairbanks addresses the Irish Fellowship Club
              of Chicago. He speaks on the Irish race in America.

 April.     Charles N. Harris, a member of the Society, is this
              month appointed a city magistrate of New York by Mayor
              McClellan.

 April 3.   Ex-Congressman Joseph H. Walker, Worcester, Mass., died this
              morning. He was born in Boston, 1829. His second wife was
              a daughter of Michael Kelley of New Hampton, N. H.

 April 8.   Hon. John D. Crimmins has sold today a collection of
              autographs and literary treasures. Letters and documents
              covering the Revolutionary War period were among this
              collection. The sale attracted much interest. Death of
              Col. Frances E. Lacey, a retired officer of the U. S. A.,
              who had been residing with his son in New York City.
              Colonel Lacey served with distinction throughout the Civil
              War, with the Second Infantry, and participated in many
              great battles. He remained in the service at the
              reorganization in 1866, and was transferred to the Tenth
              Infantry, in which organization he remained for
              twenty-seven years, being the ranking officer in point of
              service in the regiment. He was then a major and assigned
              to the Seventeenth Infantry, and was at Columbus barracks.
              Major Lacey was in Columbus for two and one-half years
              from 1895. He was later made a lieutenant-colonel of the
              Third Infantry and retired in 1897 as a colonel on pay.
              Colonel Lacey was born in Limerick, Ireland, in 1833. He
              came to Columbus while a young man in time to join the
              forces of the Union. He was full of pluck and energy and
              made a model soldier. His promotions came rapidly. Colonel
              Lacey leaves three sons and one daughter, George B., who
              resides in Columbus; R. E., who resides in Columbus;
              Captain Francis E., of the First Infantry, now in the
              Philippines; Mrs. F. S. Cuchen, wife of Captain Cuchen of
              Governor’s Island. Interment was made at the National
              Cemetery, Fort Leavenworth, Kan. Colonel Lacey was a
              strong Irish Nationalist, and for many years a member of
              the Robert Emmet Association of Columbus, O. At a regular
              meeting of the association appropriate resolutions on his
              death were adopted.

 April 9.   Osborne Howes, Brookline, Mass., a member of the Society,
              died today. He was a descendant of David O’Killia, who
              settled on Cape Cod, Mass., as early as 1657.

 April 14.  _The Boston Sunday Herald_ today has an article, in
              connection with the coming Jamestown exposition, relative
              to John Boyle O’Reilly’s visit to the Dismal Swamp in
              1888, or thereabouts, in company with Edward A. Moseley,
              Esq.

 April 19.  _The New York Times_ of this date has the following: “At
              the instigation of President McGowan, there will be
              introduced at the meeting of the aldermen on next Tuesday
              a resolution asking Mayor McClellan to see what can be
              done through the United States Department of State toward
              recovering from the British government part of the records
              of the City Fathers of proceedings in the Revolutionary
              period, and which the British took with them when they
              evacuated New York. Mr. McGowan has learned that the
              aldermanic records for that period are all that are
              required to make complete the city’s record of the
              legislative work done by the municipal authorities. There
              is a record showing that the missing papers were taken
              away by the English, and Mr. McGowan believes that if the
              British authorities were asked to return them they would
              either do so or would at least permit a copy of them to be
              made.”

 April 20.  At a meeting of the Fitchburg, Mass., Bar Association this
              morning, Mayor James H. McMahon presiding, resolutions
              were adopted for presentation to Gov. Curtis Guild, Jr.,
              favoring the appointment of an associate judge of
              Worcester County probate court from the northern part of
              the county, and a committee was appointed to present to
              the governor the names of Thomas F. Gallager, judge of the
              Fitchburg police court, and Clark A. Batchelder as
              candidates.

 April 21.  Lieut.-Col. Lewis Smith (U. S. A.), of Washington, retired,
              died on April 21, aged seventy-three years. He was born
              in Ireland and enlisted in the army in 1851, serving as
              private, corporal and sergeant until 1862, when he was
              commissioned second lieutenant of the Third Artillery. In
              1898, after forty-seven years’ service, he was retired
              with the rank of major, but was subsequently promoted to
              lieutenant-colonel.

 April 22.  A dispatch from Washington, D. C., announces the assignment
              of Lieut. M. O’Connor to the Fifteenth U. S. Cavalry.
              Gunner J. F. Carmody is assigned, by naval orders, to the
              _Tacoma_.

 April 23.  Annual banquet tonight in New York City of the Veteran Corps
              of the Sixty-Ninth Regiment. It was the anniversary of the
              departure of the regiment for the seat of war on April 23,
              1861. There were about 250 men in the banquet hall, but it
              was a matter of comment that the great majority of these
              were young men. The veterans were there, what are left
              of them. The first hearty applause of the evening was
              given when Lieut.Gov. Chanler entered the room. Awaiting
              him at the guest table were Borough President Patrick F.
              McGowan, Senator John P. Cohalan, the Rev. Dr. David G.
              Wylie, Rev. Father Chidwick, Magistrate Matthew P. Breen
              and his son, Henry J. Breen, Col. Edward Duffy, Justice
              John Henry McCarthy, Thomas J. Byrne, William F. Baker,
              president of the civil service board; Thomas E. Crimmins
              and Magistrates Baker and Walsh. There were others, too.

 April 27.  Hon. William Shepherd, ex-mayor of Lynn, Mass., died late
              today at the Carney Hospital, Boston. He was a native of
              Ireland and was born in 1837. He came to this country when
              a boy. He was mayor of Lynn for several terms.

 April 30.  Governor Higgins of Rhode Island today formally opened the
              Rhode Island building at the Jamestown Exposition,
              Virginia. He was introduced by Judge Blodgett of the
              Supreme Court of Rhode Island and chairman of the Rhode
              Island commission, as the youngest governor of any state
              in the Union.

 May.       General Peter Leary, Jr., has written to the U. S. war
              department, on behalf of residents of Baltimore, Md.,
              against the proposition to dismantle Fort McHenry of its
              guns. An answer has been received stating that if the city
              would pay for the gun carriages it can have the guns
              themselves. The war department places a value of about
              $800 on ten gun carriages, seven of which are at Fort
              McHenry and three at Fort Delaware. General Leary wrote
              the department that there is a movement on foot to raise
              the amount by popular subscription, and asked a month’s
              grace before the guns are dismantled.

 May 1.     It is announced from Washington, D. C., that James Jeffrey
              Roche of Massachusetts, U. S. consul at Genoa, has been
              promoted to be consul at Berne.

 May 5.     Hon. Patrick Keenan, city chamberlain of New York, passed
              away today, much and deservedly regretted.

[Illustration:

  MR. JOHN F. DOYLE,
  New York City.
]

[Illustration:

  MR. JAMES J. PHELAN,
  New York City.
]

[Illustration:

  MR. M. R. F. McCARTHY,
  Binghamton, N. Y.
]

[Illustration:

  HON. CORNELIUS HORIGAN,
  Biddeford, Me.
]

[Illustration:

  JUDGE JOHN J. McDONOUGH,
  Fall River, Mass.
]

                      FIVE MEMBERS OF THE SOCIETY.

 May 6.     Mayor McClellan of New York City writes as follows: May 6,
              1907. To the Honorable, the Board of Aldermen of the City
              of New York: Gentlemen:—It is my duty to inform your
              honorable body, for such action as you may deem fitting,
              of the death of Patrick Keenan, chamberlain of the city of
              New York. For seven consecutive terms a member of your
              honorable body, once your presiding officer, once clerk of
              the county of New York, and thrice chamberlain of the
              city, Mr. Keenan enjoyed public confidence to an extent
              attained by few men. He died in the fulness of man’s
              allotted years, with no tarnish on the honor he prized so
              much, and with only words of grief and praise from the
              friends who venerated him and the citizens he faithfully
              served. It is my privilege thus to express my sorrow at
              the loss of a friend whose conduct rewarded the trust I
              twice had the honor to repose in him.

            Respectfully,

            GEO. B. MCCLELLAN, _Mayor_.

 May 11.    Admiral McGowan, president-general of the Society, sailed
              today from New York for Antwerp.

 May 13.    J. Taylor Ellison, lieutenant-governor of Virginia, for
              the Jamestown Exposition officials, has asked the city
              of Albany for the loan of the oil portraits of former
              governors John Jay, Dewitt Clinton and George Clinton,
              and former Mayor Dirck Tenbroeck, which hang in the
              common council gallery, and the original Dongan charter
              of the city of Albany of 1686, as well as the framed
              bill of expense for the trip of Indian chiefs to England
              in 1710, which hangs in the mayor’s office. The city
              authorities are in doubt whether to comply with the
              request. The portraits asked for were painted by artists
              from special sittings by the originals and the Dongan
              charter is priceless.

 May 15.    Information comes from Washington, D. C., that Capt. Michael
              J. McDonough, Corps of Engineers, is relieved from duty at
              the West Point Academy and will join his proper station.

 May 18.    A dispatch from Washington, D. C., says that it was
              announced at the state department today that Thomas J.
              O’Brien of Michigan, United States minister to Copenhagen,
              will become ambassador to Japan in September, on the
              retirement of Luke E. Wright of Tennessee, who has given
              notice to the department that he wishes to leave the
              service at that time. A successor to Mr. O’Brien at
              Copenhagen has not yet been secured.

 May 23.    Word from Washington, D. C., states that Dr. Maurice Francis
              Egan, professor of English language and literature at
              the Catholic University of America, today accepted the
              post of minister to Denmark, offered to him by President
              Roosevelt. The date on which he will enter upon his duties
              will be determined by the State department.

 May 27.    Word comes from Copenhagen that King Frederick has given
              a farewell dinner to the retiring American minister,
              Mr. O’Brien, and Mrs. O’Brien, Mr. O’Brien having been
              appointed American ambassador at Tokio.

 June.      Army orders this month at the war department, Washington, D.
              C., grant leave of absence, from July 15 to August 31, to
              Major Timothy D. Keleher. Paymaster Capt. Charles G. Dwyer
              is to report to the paymaster-general of the army for
              temporary duty at a certain point.

 June 9.    Col. James B. Quinn of the U. S. Engineer Corps is retired.

 June 13.   From Washington, D. C., is announced the appointment of
              Major Thomas B. Dugan, Twelfth U. S. Cavalry, as a member
              of a board to meet at Kansas City, Mo., for inspection
              duty. First Lieutenant John C. Murphy, Fourth U. S.
              Infantry, having been found incapacitated for active
              service from disability, is retired about this date.

 June 14.   About this date, First Lieut. Thomas F. Ryan, Eleventh U.
              S. Cavalry, recruiting officer, Springfield, Mass., is
              ordered to Bellows Falls, Vt., to secure certain evidence.

 June 24.   President Theodore Roosevelt today appointed Michael E.
              Bannin of New York a member of the board of Indian
              commissioners, to succeed Maurice Francis Egan, who
              resigned to accept a diplomatic post. Mr. Bannin is a
              member of the American-Irish Historical Society.

 July 3.    An order issued at the war department, Washington, D. C.,
              about this date, provides that Capt. Michael J. Lenihan,
              of the general staff, will proceed to New London, Ct.,
              and witness and report on joint army and militia post
              defence exercises to be held July 15 to July 26. Upon
              the completion of his duties at New London, Captain
              Lenihan will proceed to the artillery district of Boston
              and witness and report on the joint army and militia
              coast defence exercises in that district July 28 to
              August 3. He will then go to the artillery district of
              Portland for like duty.

 July 9.    It is announced from Washington, D. C., that Major Daniel E.
              McCarthy, quartermaster, is relieved from duty in the
              Philippine division, to take effect upon the arrival of
              Major Bingham of Manila, and will proceed to San Francisco
              and report by telegraph to the adjutant-general of the
              army for instructions.

 July 17.   First Lieut. James Bourke, assistant surgeon, is ordered by
              the war department to report August 15 to Major William H.
              Arthur, president of the examining board, Washington, D.
              C., for examination for advancement.

 July 17.   By orders issued about this date by the war department,
              Capt. Michael J. McDonough, when relieved at the U. S.
              Military Academy, will proceed to Fort Leavenworth, Kan.,
              and report to the commanding officer for duty with the
              third battalion of engineers.

 July 17.   Lieut. Peter J. Hennessey, Fifth U. S. Cavalry, by orders
              from the war department, will accompany the two troops of
              cavalry and the machine guns, national guard of Rhode
              Island, on practice march, commencing July 22, and upon
              the completion of this duty will return to Fort Adams, R.
              I.

 August.    Information from the war department, Washington, D. C.:
              William J. O’Loughlin, who has been a second lieutenant in
              the Second U. S. Infantry, has been promoted to first
              lieutenant and assigned to the Fourteenth Infantry. John
              J. Ryan, first lieutenant, Twelfth U. S. Cavalry, has been
              promoted to captain and assigned to the Tenth Cavalry.
              First Lieutenant John G. Donovan, Coast Artillery, is
              allowed about this time, with other officers, ten days’
              leave of absence. Second Lieutenant James O’Connor has
              been assigned to Havana for duty with the Second Battalion
              of Engineers.

 August.    Death of Peter McDonnell, a member of the American-Irish
              Historical Society, dies. His death took place aboard the
              White Star steamer _Oceanic_, while he was returning from
              a visit to Ireland.

 August.    David McClure of New York City, a member of the
              American-Irish Historical Society, participated in the
              dedication this month of a monument at Fontenoy. The
              monument commemorates the valor of the Irish brigade in
              the battle of Fontenoy, 1745.

 Aug. 18.   There is an article in the Boston _Sunday Globe_ today on
              the library of Dr. M. F. Sullivan, Lawrence, Mass. It
              is of an appreciative nature and devotes considerable
              attention to the publications of the American-Irish
              Historical Society.

 Aug. 25.   Edward A. Kelly died at Cohasset, Mass., about this date.
              Mr. Kelly was in the eighth generation from John Kelly,
              one of the early settlers of Newbury, Mass., who is
              believed to have come to that place about 1635.

 Sept. 13.  A reunion of the McGillicuddys took place today at Glen’s
              Falls, N. Y. The occasion was one of very great interest
              to members of this historic old Irish family. An
              organization was formed and officers were elected.

 Sept. 28.  A despatch from Yokohama states that Secretary Taft arrived
              there today on board the steamer _Minnesota_ from Seattle,
              passing all the signal stations without being sighted.
              The reception committees and the members of the American
              embassy, who had come there from Tokio to welcome Mr.
              Taft, were aroused by rumors, the town was soon enlivened
              and the bay crowded with launches displaying American
              flags and other colors. Secretary and Mrs. Taft and Thomas
              J. O’Brien, the new American ambassador to Japan, and
              Mrs. O’Brien met the visitors from the shore in the main
              saloon of the _Minnesota_ at 7.30 a. m., while the United
              States cruiser _Chattanooga_, anchored in the bay, saluted
              Secretary Taft’s flag, as secretary of war, which was
              hoisted at the fore.

 Oct. 15.   William B. Sullivan, Danvers, Mass., reads a paper before
              the St. Mary’s School Alumni Association, Salem, Mass., on
              “The Early Catholic Church in Massachusetts.” He later had
              the paper brought out in pamphlet form. Mr. Sullivan is a
              member of the American-Irish Historical Society.

 Oct. 19.   A telegram published today states that a turret accident on
              board the battleship _Connecticut_, similar to those on
              the _Georgia_ and several other of the U. S. big fighting
              ships, was averted by the presence of mind and heroism of
              Lieut. William Pigott Cronan, has just come to light
              through the summoning of a board of inquiry at the New
              York navy yard. According to the story, Lieutenant Cronan
              was in command of one of the eight-inch guns on the
              _Connecticut_ during recent target practice off New
              England. As the powder charge was thrust into the gun, the
              lieutenant noticed that from a small hole in the bag a
              quantity of powder had escaped and fallen into the threads
              into which the breech-block of the gun screws. Realizing
              that the action of screwing the breach-block back home
              would ignite the powder before the block could be firmly
              screwed home, causing the entire charge to explode back
              into the turret, Lieutenant Cronan shouted an order which
              stopped every man in the turret, as he stood, except the
              man who was closing the breech of the gun. He did not hear
              the shout and continued to swing the block home.
              Lieutenant Cronan sprang forward and thrust his hand into
              the breech of the gun. The breech closed on his hand,
              badly mangling it and cleanly cutting off the first
              finger, which fell into the grooves and caused the closing
              mechanism to clog. The sailor at the breech of the gun
              fainted when he discovered what he had done and what he
              had narrowly escaped doing. If the breech had been closed
              it is likely that every man in the turret would have been
              killed. The board of inquiry was called to determine how
              the hole came into the powder bag. Cronan is a son of
              Patrick J. Cronan of New Haven. During the war with Spain,
              Lieutenant Cronan was highly commended for several acts of
              bravery. The following is another account: While the
              battleship _Connecticut_ was engaged in target practice
              off Cape Cod last week, Lieutenant William P. Cronan
              undoubtedly prevented a repetition of the fatal explosion
              on the _Georgia_ by staying the closing of the breech of
              the eight-inch barker in the after turret by inserting his
              fingers in the breech grooves just as the heavy butt of
              metal was swinging into place. When they swung back the
              breech-block the fragments of his first and second
              fingers, severed at the first joint, were found ground
              into the grooves. The _Connecticut_ had joined the rest of
              the squadron in target practice off Cape Cod last week and
              all of the eight-inch guns were being worked. The firing
              was fast, it being a part of the test that the guns should
              be fired as rapidly and as accurately as possible, and in
              order to outdo the sailors on the other ships that were
              engaged in the practice, the _Connecticut’s_ men were
              working hard to load, train and fire the four big tubes in
              the starboard and port turrets. The eight men working
              under command of Lieutenant Cronan in the aft starboard
              turret were swinging to their task like pieces of
              mechanism in a single machine. Two men worked the powder
              hoist from the magazines below, two swabbed out the gun
              after each shot, two lifted the bags of powder into the
              breech after the heavy shell had been placed, and one man
              swung back and locked the breech for the firing. It was
              bang! and in an instant the breech was open and the men
              were sucking in the powder fumes while they swabbed and
              hoisted and charged the big gun for another shot. The gun
              got so hot that it was difficult to place a hand on the
              breech without blistering it. The men with the water swabs
              kept the temperature down to the safety point inside the
              chamber, but even at that it was almost hot enough to
              flash powder and a little friction would have been enough
              to set off any spare grains.

 Nov. 1.    Rt. Rev. Mgr. Thomas H. Wallace, a member of the
              American-Irish Historical Society, died this evening. He
              was rector of St. Patrick’s Church, Lewiston, Me.

 Nov. 5.    Hon. James H. Higgins is re-elected governor of Rhode
              Island. Hon. Patrick J. McCarthy is re-elected mayor of
              Providence, R. I.

 Nov. 9.    Capt. Dennis E. Nolan, Thirtieth U. S. Infantry, has been
              ordered to the Philippines as inspector of constabulary.

 Nov. 9.    A dispatch from Durham, N. H., which was published in the
              Boston _Herald_ today, reads as follows: (Special Dispatch
              to the _Sunday Herald_.) Durham, N. H., Nov. 9.—For some
              years there has been a movement to restore the burial
              place of Maj.-Gen. John Sullivan, who died in Durham
              January 23, 1795. This labor of love, shared by many
              prominent people both in and out of Durham, is now
              completed. A substantial wall has been erected around
              the little cemetery, the lot has been cleared and graded,
              the gravestones reset and iron gates provided at the
              entrance. As marking the end of this labor, a Sullivan
              commemoration service has been planned for next Monday
              afternoon, and an invitation to attend the ceremonies
              is extended to all who cherish the dead general’s memory.
              Descendants of General Sullivan, members of the Grand
              Army posts and various historical societies and many
              others have already signified their intention of being
              present. The program will include an oration by the Rev.
              William Elliot Griffis, D. D., of Ithaca, N. Y., a
              celebrated authority on matters pertaining to General
              Sullivan. The faculty of the New Hampshire State College
              have volunteered to suspend college exercises during the
              ceremonies, and the student battalion and college brass
              band will perform escort duty. The procession will start
              from the Congregational Church at 2.30 o’clock, proceeding
              to the cemetery, where the exercises will be held. The
              oration will be delivered at the church immediately
              afterward. The house General Sullivan occupied will be
              open for inspection by visitors during the day, also every
              department of the state college and its work, in which
              institution patriotism for present day needs is being
              nurtured.

 December.  Death at Quebec this month of the Hon. Felix Carbray, a
              member of the Society.

 Dec. 2.    Congressman Wiley of Alabama introduced the following bill
              in the National House of Representatives today. It was
              referred to the committee on the library and ordered to
              be printed: A Bill for the erection of a monument to
              Jeremiah O’Brien: Be it enacted by the Senate and House
              of Representatives of the United States of America in
              Congress assembled, That the sum of fifty thousand dollars
              be, and the same is hereby appropriated, out of any money
              in the treasury not otherwise appropriated, for the
              erection in the city of Washington, District of Columbia,
              of a monument to the memory of Jeremiah O’Brien, upon
              which shall be inscribed the words:

                                  Erected to the memory of

                                 The heroic Irish-American,

                                      JEREMIAH O’BRIEN,

                                        Who captured

                                  In the first sea fight of

                                    The Revolutionary War

                              The British schooner Margaretta.

            Said sum shall be expended under the direction of the
              secretary of navy, or such officer as he may designate,
              and in such sums as the work may require from time to
              time.

 Dec. 30.   A meeting of the executive council of the Society was held
              this evening at the Narragansett Hotel, Providence, R. I.

[Illustration:

  MR. WILLIAM F. CLARE,
  New York City.
]

[Illustration:

  NATHANIEL DOYLE,
  New York City.
]

[Illustration:

  HON. D. J. McGILLICUDDY,
  Lewiston, Me.
]

[Illustration:

  M. B. SULLIVAN. M. D.,
  Dover, N. H.
]

                      FOUR MEMBERS OF THE SOCIETY.




                               NECROLOGY.


The following members of the Society died during the year 1907, much and
deservedly regretted:


                      Rt. Rev. WILLIAM STANG. D.D.

Bishop of the Roman Catholic diocese of Fall River, Mass., died February
2, at St. Mary’s Hospital, Rochester, Minn. He was born at
Langenbruchen, Baden-Baden, Germany, on April 21, 1854. His early
education was received in the German Gymnasia, but as he had chosen the
career of a missionary, he made his theological studies in the American
College at Louvain, Belgium, and was there ordained to the priesthood,
on June 15, 1878. After a brief service as professor in his Alma Mater,
he came to the United States in 1879, and was accepted by the late
Bishop Hendricken into the diocese of Providence, R. I. He adopted his
new country in wholehearted fashion. In 1884, Father Stang was appointed
rector of St. Anne’s Church, Cranston, R. I. He became rector of the
Providence Cathedral, and held that important charge until 1895, when he
returned to Louvain, to serve his church and country as vice-rector of
the American College for a term of three years. Back to Providence in
1898, he organized and headed the Providence apostolate—a band of
missionary priests organized especially for missions to non-Catholics.
He was also rector of St. Edward’s Church for three years, and then
chancellor, until the division of the diocese of Providence in 1904, and
his appointment to the new diocese of Fall River. Bishop Stang was
consecrated in the Providence Cathedral during the same year, on May 1.
He managed to combine the arduous ordinary work of the priesthood with
the special work of the continuous student and author. Almost from the
first year of his priesthood he was writing for the Catholic magazines
and bringing out books. His published works, the last of which was
brought out since his consecration, are: “The Life of Martin Luther,”
“The Eve of the Reformation,” “More About the Huguenots,” “Germany’s
Debt to Ireland,” “Pastoral Theology,” “Historiographia Ecclesiastica,”
“The Business Guide for Priests,” “Theologia Fundamentalis Moralis,”
“The Devil, Who He Is,” “Spiritual Pepper and Salt,” and “Socialism and
Christianity.” His last magazine article, “Father Denifle and His Great
and Lasting Work,” appeared in the _American Ecclesiastical Review_ for
January, 1907.


                            JOHN B. SULLIVAN

of New Bedford, Mass. He died there February 9. Mr. Sullivan was born in
Castletown, County Cork, June 24, 1847, the son of Timothy and Honora
(Harrington) Sullivan. He received a common school education in his
native town and in 1867 came to this country and settled in New Bedford.
He learned the stone mason’s trade, at which he worked until 1882, when
he began contracting and building. The latter business he pursued with
conspicuous success up to the time of his death, being associated for a
number of years past with his son, Mark E. Sullivan. A number of
noteworthy New Bedford buildings have been erected by Mr. Sullivan.
Among them are St. Mary’s Home, St. Lawrence’s presbytery, the Holy
Family School, the tower of St. Lawrence’s Church, St. James’ Church,
St. Mary’s Chapel, the Park Hotel, No. 8 Engine House, the Connell block
on Purchase St., the Dawson building and the addition to St. Joseph’s
Hospital. He built several schoolhouses for the city, and on the second
set of plans for the high school was the lowest bidder. His firm secured
the contract for finishing St. Anthony’s Church. Besides a large number
of public buildings, Mr. Sullivan was an extensive builder of houses in
the north part of the city. He carried on a stone quarry in addition to
his building business. Mr. Sullivan was a trustee of St. Lawrence
parish, a member of and one of the organizers of the Master Builders’
Association, and a member of the New Bedford Board of Trade, the
Plymouth Club and Holy Name Society of St. Lawrence Church. In August,
1872, he married Miss Margaret Sullivan, who died, leaving one son, Mark
E. By his second wife, who was Katherine E. Sullivan, he had two
children, Mary and Frank.


                             OSBORNE HOWES.

He was a descendant of David O’Killia, who settled on Cape Cod, Mass.,
as early as 1657. Osborne Howes was born in Boston in 1846 and was
educated in private and public schools of the city. Soon after his
graduation he entered the service of the Pacific Mail Steamship Company
on the steamers of that line running between Panama, San Francisco and
Hongkong. After three years thus spent on the Pacific coast, he went to
New York City and there began a connection with newspaper work which
continued almost up to the time of his death. Beginning in the office of
the _New York Tribune_, he was afterward employed by the _New York
Times_, serving on that paper during its exposé of the “Tweed ring.” In
1873 he accepted the position of secretary of the Boston board of fire
underwriters, and was always thereafter identified with that body.
Having resumed his residence in Boston, he was appointed from time to
time to various public offices. As representative of the board of
underwriters he was instrumental in having that board take action upon
several important public questions. The resolution committing the
associated board of trade to the principle that all future subways in
Boston should be built under such conditions that they would ultimately
revert to the city, was drawn up, presented and urged by him, and as a
result of its adoption the Boston Associated Board of Trade was the
foremost opponent on this question of excessive corporate demands. As a
member of the Boston Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Howes was chairman of its
committee on the Isthmian canal, and vice-chairman of its committee on
reciprocal trade relations with Canada. In this latter connection he
addressed the boards of trade and chambers of commerce, not only of a
number of the cities of New England, but those of New York,
Philadelphia, Buffalo, Indianapolis and other cities of the West. In
1891, feeling convinced that it was desirable that public action should
be taken toward educating young men to become competent seamen, he
prepared, introduced and succeeded in having the legislature adopt a
bill creating the Nautical Training School, which the commonwealth now
maintains on board the U. S. S. _Enterprise_. From 1875 to 1877,
inclusive, Mr. Howes was a member of the common council of Boston,
representing the South End ward, in which he then resided. In 1886 he
moved his residence to the town of Brookline, and besides serving on
various town committees, became a member of the rapid transit
commission, to which he was appointed by Governor Russell; also a member
of the metropolitan district (Greater Boston) commission, to which he
was appointed by Governor Greenhalge. In 1884 Mr. Howes was a member of
the special committee of fifteen which prepared the new Boston city
charter; he also served as one of the trustees of the public library.
Mr. Howes in 1901, and again in 1902, was nominated as the Democratic
candidate for the state senate in the second Norfolk district, but was
defeated on both occasions. On the first occasion, in his letter of
acceptance, he described the state platform of the Democratic party as
“an attempt to bring back the government machinery of the commonwealth
to something approaching the simplicity of its earlier days.” On the
second he championed “more liberal and advantageous trade relations
between New England and Canada.” In 1904 Mayor Collins appointed him to
an unsalaried position as member of the board of building inspection.
The following year Mr. Howes took a leading part as chairman of the
committee on resolutions in preparing the platform of the Democratic
party in the state contest. Mr. Howes was Japanese consul in Boston at
the time of his death, which sad event took place April 9.


                            PETER McDONNELL.

Born in Ireland, died aboard the White Star steamer _Oceanic_, in
August, while returning from Ireland. Mr. McDonnell first came to this
country when a young man. For a long time he had represented the
railroads successfully at Castle Garden, the Barge Office and Ellis
Island. He was also interested in the steamship business at the
immigration station and carried on a big banking business at No. 2
Battery Place. When he went to his old home in Ireland in the spring he
was in poor health. He was accompanied by his wife and one of his six
sons. Mr. McDonnell was the secretary and a director of the Columbia Oil
Company of New York, one of the few rivals of the Standard Oil Company,
and a director of the New York Mortgage and Securities Company. He was a
member of the Catholic Club and for many years of the Friendly Sons of
St. Patrick. When President Roosevelt was the guest of the latter
organization in 1905, it will be remembered the birth of Mr. McDonnell’s
grandson, which was announced at the dinner, was one of the features of
the occasion.


                             JOHN B. SHEA.

Born in Kenmare, Ireland, 1835; he came to this country when he was
seven years of age. He died late in 1907. Mr. Shea was very successful
in business. He went to work for Andrew Berrian, a pen manufacturer, in
1849, and after being employed by Bard Bros. of Philadelphia, Alexander
Morton and Leroy W. Fairchild, he entered the factory of Aikin, Lambert
& Co., the Maiden Lane, New York, jewelers, as foreman. In 1869 he was
admitted to partnership, and when the concern was incorporated, he
became its vice-president, which position he held up to the time of his
death. Mr. Shea never married and is survived by a sister, Mary, and a
brother, Michael. He was a brother of the late Denis Shea, clothier of
Broome and Crosby streets, who was the Republican district leader of the
Second district from early in the 90s, until his death, about three
years ago. John B. Shea was his trustee.


                    Rt. Rev. Mgr. THOMAS H. WALLACE.

He was born in Somersworth, N. H. He died in Lewiston, Me., November 1.
After finishing his course in the Somersworth High School, he graduated
in 1864, entered Holy Cross College, Worcester, Mass., and carried off
the highest honors of his class at his graduation in June, 1868. In the
following September he entered the Theological Seminary of St. Sulpice,
Montreal. He was ordained priest by the first bishop of Portland, the
Rt. Rev. David William Bacon, D. D., in the Cathedral, Portland, Me.,
August 5, 1871. After his ordination he was first sent as assistant to
the pastor at Waterville, whose parish included twelve or fifteen
missions. Here the young priest began his mission work and displayed
that tireless energy and zeal that gave promise of his future success.
In 1872 he was transferred to St. Dominic’s Church in Portland to assist
the Rev. Eugene M. O’Callaghan, who is now the Rt. Rev. Monseigneur, and
vicar general of the diocese of Manchester, N. H. The careers of both
priests have been very similar, each of them receiving the purple in
1905. Father Wallace succeeded Father O’Callaghan as rector of St.
Dominic’s and to this day both are most lovingly remembered by the old
members of the parish. In August, 1876, Father Wallace was appointed
rector of St. Joseph’s, Lewiston, which has been the scene of his labors
for the past thirty-one years. He found St. Joseph’s with a debt which
he set to work at once to pay off. In March, 1880, he purchased the
Bonallie Block on Main Street. He remodelled this block and fitted it
for a school for the girls of the parish at an expense of $30,000. He
placed the school under the charge of the nuns of Notre Dame from
Montreal. In 1886 he purchased the fine property at the corner of Bates
and Walnut streets, at a cost of $25,000. This lot fronts on the City
Park and is the most beautiful site for a church in the state. He began
work at once on the foundation of the church and on June 24, 1887, the
corner stone was laid by the lamented Bishop Healy, with appropriate
ceremonies. The dedication sermon was preached by the Rt. Rev. Thomas J.
Conaty, D. D., who is now bishop of Monterey and Los Angeles, Cal. The
first mass in the sacred edifice was celebrated in 1890.

[Illustration:

  HON. FELIX CARBRAY, M. R. I. A.,

  A MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY, RECENTLY DECEASED.
]


                    Hon. FELIX CARBRAY, M. R. I. A.

A native of Quebec, born in 1835. He died in Quebec in December, 1907.
His parents were from the County Tyrone, Ireland, and came to Canada in
the early 30s. The father, Niall Carbray, was born at Carrickcastle,
near Dungannon. The old Carbray homestead still exists there and is
occupied by a member of the family. His mother was Catherine Connolly, a
native of Clogher, County Tyrone. Felix, the son, subject of this
sketch, was educated at private schools and at the Christian Brothers,
in his native city. Endowed with natural talents of no ordinary
character and with a thirst for knowledge, he applied himself earnestly
in the effort to improve his education in every possible way. He
distinguished himself in mathematics and literature. He was endowed with
a great aptitude for the acquisition of foreign languages, and was
familiar with the Spanish, Portuguese, Italian and French. He was as
thoroughly familiar with French as with English. Thus well equipped with
a superior education and a worthy ambition to make his mark in life, he
began a business course in April, 1854, as an accountant, which he
continued in some of the leading houses in his native city for fifteen
years. In May, 1869, he opened an office as a general commission and
shipping merchant, which from the beginning was most successful. In the
spring of 1870, he took as partner, Francis Routh, son of the late Sir
Randolph Routh. His mother was a Taschereau, sister of the late Cardinal
Taschereau and of the late Chief Justice Taschereau. The new firm,
Carbray & Routh, which a few years later became Carbray, Routh & Co.,
opened an office also in Montreal, Mr. Carbray managing the business of
the Quebec office and Mr. Routh that of the Montreal office. The new
firm had a long, prosperous and honorable career. No firm was more
widely known all over the business world, nor did any stand higher for
integrity and honor. The partnership, having expired in 1900, was
dissolved and the affairs liquidated; this being found to the mutual
advantage of the associates. Mr. Carbray continued the business at
Quebec with his son, William, under the name of Carbray, Son & Co., and
Mr. Routh that of Montreal under the style of F. A. Routh & Co. Both
firms have been very successful and bid fair to go on down the
generations like many of the old houses of Europe. The high character
and abilities of Felix Carbray at an earlier date attracted the
attention of his fellow citizens, and every mark of esteem and
confidence was shown him. He loved Ireland, the land of his fathers,
with an intense love, and threw himself heart and soul into every
movement tending to promote her cause or the welfare of his race. No
Irishman of his time in Quebec did more to raise the prestige of the
Irish race and the cause of Ireland among the peoples of other races. In
1883, _Redpath’s Weekly_ says of Mr. Carbray: “He is a gentleman of high
culture and deep learning. His linguistic attainments are also
remarkable. He speaks the French and English languages with equal
fluency, and as both are used in the Quebec legislature, Mr. Carbray
addresses the house in one or the other with equal elegancy, as
circumstances may require. He also converses freely in Italian, Spanish
and Portuguese. The high esteem in which he is held by his Irish fellow
citizens is best shown by the fact that they have never missed an
occasion to put him in every place of honor and trust within their gift.
He is at present their worthy representative in the parliament of the
Province of Quebec, as a member of the West Division of the city, which,
though it contains the leading British commercial men of Quebec, is
controlled by the Irish vote. Mr. Carbray is an eloquent and forcible
orator, his recent speech on the occasion of the reading of ‘the speech
from the throne,’ having been pronounced by the Canadian press as the
most remarkable English speech ever delivered in the Quebec legislature.
In his public capacity Mr. Carbray has never made an enemy, while as a
private citizen he has hosts of friends.” Rose, in his _Cyclopedia of
Canadian Biography_, says of him: He was educated at Quebec, where he
has resided throughout his life, though he has traveled extensively in
America and Europe, principally on business connected with the trade in
lumber, in which his house is engaged. He was one of the pioneers of the
lumber trade between the St. Lawrence and South America, and is still
largely interested in it. In addition to his other duties, he fills the
important position of consul of Portugal at the port of Quebec. A
Catholic in religion, Mr. Carbray has been honored by the St. Patrick’s
congregation of Quebec with election and re-election as one of the
trustees, and is also a trustee of that noble Irish Catholic charity,
the St. Bridget’s Asylum of Quebec. He has taken an equally active and
leading part in all the local national movements of his fellow
countrymen, and has been president of the St. Patrick’s Literary
Institute, the Irish National Association, and other Irish bodies in
Quebec. He is a Liberal-Conservative in politics, and at the provincial
general elections in 1881, yielding to the solicitations of his friends,
he ran as the party candidate for the electoral division of Quebec West,
and, after a hard fight, was elected by a good majority to represent
that constituency in the legislative assembly in the province. His
parliamentary career was very creditable. Though he did not often
address the house, he was always listened to with the utmost respect,
being an equally good speaker and debater in both English and French,
and never wasting his powder except on serious and interesting subjects
with which he was most conversant, such, especially, as questions of
finance and commerce. In May, 1854, he married Miss Margaret Carberry, a
daughter of the late William Carberry of Carrick-on-Suir, Ireland, of
whom he had four sons and six daughters. Those still living are: Herbert
of Montreal; William, Quebec; Thomas John, a promising lawyer; Mrs. P.
L. Connor, Boston; Mrs. Alfred Carroll, Montreal, and Grace. His
youngest daughter, Grace, and son, Thomas, live with him at “Benburb
Place,” and the Ramparts. Mrs. Carbray died in May, 1895. She was a
patriotic Irish woman and revered and esteemed for her piety and
devotedness to God’s poor. In October, 1902, he married Miss Brigid
Carberry—widow of the late Nicholas K. Connolly—sister of his first
wife. The marriage ceremony was performed at St. Gabriel’s Church, New
York, by Archbishop Farley. She died on July 1, 1903, deeply regretted
by her sorrowing husband and all who knew her. A most amiable lady and,
like her sister, devoted to the poor. Mr. Carbray filled many
distinguished positions in his life; he is held in high esteem by his
fellow citizens of all races, creeds and politics. He was a member of
the Quebec Harbor Commission, of the Quebec Board of Trade, consul for
Portugal, and, being the oldest consul here, is dean of the Consular
Corps, senior trustee of St. Patrick’s Church, of the St. Bridget’s
Asylum Association, president of the United Irish League, etc., etc. Mr.
Carbray was an ardent upholder of the movement for the revival of the
Irish language. He delivered a lecture on this subject at Tara Hall,
Quebec, in April, 1899, which displayed profound knowledge of the
subject, and attracted the attention and encomiums of the whole Celtic
world. Mr. Carbray had a collection of books on Ireland which formed
probably the best of its kind in Canada. He was a member of the Royal
Irish Academy.

[Illustration:

  HON. THOMAS Z. LEE.
]

[Illustration:

  COL. JAMES MORAN.
]

[Illustration:

  MR. MICHAEL F. DOOLEY.
]

[Illustration:

  MR. JOHN F. O’CONNELL.
]

[Illustration:

  MR. PATRICK CARTER.
]

            SOME PROVIDENCE (R. I.) MEMBERS OF THE SOCIETY.




                            MEMBERSHIP ROLL
                                 OF THE
                   AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.


            [For officers of the Society see pages 5 and 6.]

  =Adams, Hon. Samuel=, president and treasurer of the O’Neill-Adams
      Co., 20th to 22d Street, Sixth Avenue, New York City; director,
      Garfield National Bank; member of the New York Chamber of
      Commerce; trustee, Excelsior Savings Bank; an ex-state senator of
      Colorado.

  =Adams, T. Albeus=, president, Manhattan Refrigerating Co., 525 West
      Street, New York City; president, Adams & Co., New York;
      president, Union Terminal Cold Storage Co., Jersey City, N. J.

  =Ahern, John=, 5 Highland Street, Concord, N. H.

  =Aspell, John= (M. D.), 139 West 77th Street, New York City; member of
      the Academy of Medicine; of the County Medical Association, and of
      the Celtic Medical Society; recently president of the latter;
      visiting surgeon to St. Vincent’s Hospital.

  =Bannin, Michael E.=, of Converse, Stanton & Co., dry goods commission
      merchants, 83 and 85 Worth Street, New York City; member of the
      Merchants Association, New York; director, the Emigrant Industrial
      Savings Bank; member of the Merchants and Catholic clubs, New
      York, of the Montauk Club, Brooklyn, and of the Brooklyn Arts and
      Science Institute; director, the Columbian National Life Insurance
      Co.; director, American Investment Securities Co.; director,
      Citizen Trust Co., Brooklyn.

  =Bannon, Henry G.=, 107 East 55th Street, New York City; president of
      the Irish National Club; secretary, Celtic-American Publishing Co.

  =Barrett, Michael F.=, of Barrett Bros., wholesale and retail dealers
      in teas, coffees, etc., 308 Spring Street and 574 Hudson Street,
      New York City.

  =Barry, Hon. Patrick T.=, 87–97 South Jefferson Street, Chicago, Ill.
      (Life member of the Society); advertising manager, Chicago
      Newspaper Union; director, First National Bank of Englewood, Ill.;
      director, The _Chicago Citizen_ Company; has been a member of the
      state Legislature of Illinois; prominently identified with
      educational interests.

  =Baxter, Rev. James J.= (D. D.), 9 Whitmore Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Blake, Michael=, of John Leonard & Co., iron and steel, 149 Broadway,
      New York City.

  =Bodfish, Rev. Joshua P. L.=, Canton, Mass.; formerly chancellor of
      the Roman Catholic archdiocese of Boston; a director of the Bunker
      Hill Monument Association.

  =Bourlet, John W.=, of the Rumford Printing Co., Concord, N. H.

  =Boyle, Hon. Patrick J.=, Newport, R. I.; has been mayor of that city
      many terms.

  =Brady, Rev. Cyrus Townsend= (LL. D.), rector, Trinity P. E. Church,
      Toledo, Ohio; member of the Society of Colonial Wars, of the Sons
      of the Revolution, of the Military Order of Foreign Wars, and of
      other patriotic organizations; chaplain of the First Pennsylvania
      Volunteer Infantry, war with Spain; formerly Protestant Episcopal
      archdeacon of Pennsylvania; author of _For Love of Country_, _For
      the Freedom of the Sea_, _Stephen Decatur_, _Commodore Paul
      Jones_, _Border Fights and Fighters_, _The True Andrew Jackson_,
      and other works.

  =Brady, Owen J.=, with The H. B. Claflin Co., 224 Church Street, New
      York City.

  =Brandon, Edward J.=, lawyer, city clerk, Cambridge, Mass.

  =Brann, Rev. Henry A.= (D. D., LL. D.), 141 East 43d Street, New York
      City (Life member of the Society).

  =Brennan, Hon. James F.=, lawyer, Peterborough, N. H.; a trustee of
      the New Hampshire State Library.

  =Brennan, James F.=, contractor, 2 Garden Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Brennan, P. J.=, 788 West End Avenue, New York City.

  =Brett, Frank P.=, town clerk and attorney, Waterbury, Conn.; member
      of the Connecticut Legislature. He is town clerk of Waterbury, in
      which city he was born December 13, 1869. He was educated in the
      public schools, graduating from the high school in ’88 and from
      the Yale Law School in 1892. He was a member of the town board of
      school visitors from 1892 to 1897; was elected to the Legislature
      in 1899; was town clerk from 1900 to 1904 and from 1906 to the
      present time. Mr. Brett is a son of Patrick Brett, formerly
      secretary of the Waterbury Buckle Company. Mrs. Brett before
      marriage was Miss Elizabeth Slater, and taught in the first
      Catholic school in Waterbury, being one of the five Slater
      sisters, all of whom taught there. She also taught in Worcester,
      Mass., and in Newark, N. J., with Father McQuade, the present
      bishop of Rochester, N. Y.

  =Breen, Henry J.=, lawyer, 243 West 99th Street, New York City.

  =Breen, Hon. Matthew=, a New York City magistrate, 243 West 99th
      Street.

  =Brierly, Frank=, 268 West 131st Street, New York City.

  =Broderick, William J.=, 52 Morton Street, New York City.

  =Brosnahan, Rev. Timothy=, rector of St. Mary’s Church, Waltham, Mass.

  =Buckley, Andrew, Parsons=, Labette County, Kansas.

  =Burke, Robert E.=, recently city solicitor, Newburyport, Mass.

  =Burr, William P.=, office of the Corporation Counsel, New York City.

  =Butler, M. J.=, real estate and insurance, Morris Avenue, corner of
      144th Street, New York City.

  =Butler, T. Vincent=, with R. G. Dun & Co., New York City.

  =Buttimer, Thomas H.=, lawyer, Hingham and Boston, Mass.

  =Byrne, Dr. C. E.=, of the C. E. Byrne Piano Co., East 41st Street,
      New York City.

  =Byrne, Joseph M.=, insurance, 800 Broad Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Byrne, Rt. Rev. Mgr. William= (D. D.), rector of St. Cecilia’s
      Church, St. Cecilia Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Byrnes, Patrick J.=, builder and general contractor, 105 East 31st
      Street, New York City.

  =Cahill, John H.=, lawyer, 15 Dey Street, New York City; prominently
      identified with telephone interests; vice-president, secretary,
      attorney and director of the New York Telephone Co.; director of
      the Empire City Subway Co. He is also a director of the American
      District Telephone Co.; the Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Co.;
      the Holmes Protective Co.; the New England Telephone and Telegraph
      Co.; the Delaware Telegraph and Telephone Co.; Northwestern
      Telephone and Telegraph Co., and the Southwestern Telephone and
      Telegraph Co.

  =Calnin, James=, 101–107 Lakeview Avenue, Lowell, Mass.

  =Cannon, Thomas H.=, of the law firm Cannon & Poage, Stock Exchange
      Building, Chicago, Ill.

  =Carmody, T. F.=, lawyer, Burpee & Carmody, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Carney, Michael=, of M. Carney & Co., Lawrence, Mass.

  =Carroll, Edward=, Leavenworth National Bank, Leavenworth, Kansas.

  =Carroll, Edward R.=, 333 East 51st Street, New York City; clerk’s
      office, Court of General Sessions of the Peace, City and County of
      New York.

  =Carroll, John L.=, secretary, American Oil & Supply Co., 23 Division
      Place, Newark, N. J.

  =Carter, Patrick=, real estate, mortgages and insurance, 32
      Westminster Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Carter, Hon. Thomas H.=, Helena, Mont.; a United States senator.

  =Carty, John J.=, Short Hills, N. J.

  =Casey, Michael=, of Casey & Bacon, wholesale grocers, Pittsfield,
      Mass.

  =Cassidy, John J.=, 907 Adams Street, Wilmington, Del.

  =Cassidy, Patrick= (M. D.), Norwich, Conn.; was surgeon-general on the
      staff of Gov. Luzon B. Morris of Connecticut, ranking as
      brigadier-general.

  =Cavanaugh, F. J.=, 31 Union Square, New York City; merchant.

  =Chittick, Rev. J. J.=, Hyde Park, Mass.

  =Clancy, Laurence=, dry goods merchant, West Bridge Street, Oswego, N.
      Y.; president of L. Clancy, Sons & Co.; trustee, Oswego County
      Savings Bank; director, electric street railway; member, Normal
      school board; has repeatedly declined a nomination for mayor of
      Oswego.

  =Clare, William F.=, lawyer, 71 Nassau Street, New York City.

  =Clark, Rev. James F.=, New Bedford, Mass.

  =Clarke, James=, of James Clarke & Co., booksellers and publishers, 3,
      5 and 7 West 22d Street, New York City.

  =Clarke, Joseph I. C.=, Sunday editor, New York _Herald_, Herald
      Square, New York City; residence, 159 West 95th Street.

  =Clary, Charles H.=, Hallowell, Me.; a descendant of John Clary, “of
      Newcastle, province of New Hampshire,” who married Jane Mahoney,
      of Georgetown, Me., 1750. Four children were born to them before
      1760. Mr. Clary of Hallowell, Me., here mentioned, was one of the
      founders of the Clary Reunion Family which meets annually.

  =Cockran, Hon. W. Bourke=, 31 Nassau Street, New York City; a member
      of Congress. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Coghlan, Rev. Gerald P.=, 2141 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, Pa.

  =Cohalan, Daniel F.=, lawyer, 2 Rector Street, New York City.

  =Coleman, John=, capitalist, Louisville, Ky.

  =Collins, James M.=, 6 Sexton Avenue, Concord, N. H.

  =Collins, Hon. John S.=, Gilsum, N. H.; manufacturer of woolens; an
      ex-state senator of New Hampshire.

  =Collins, Brig. Gen. D. F.=, 637 Pearl Street, Elizabeth, N. J.

  =Conaty, Bernard=, 30 Cypress Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Conaty, Rev. B. S.=, 340 Cambridge Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Conaty, Rt. Rev. Thomas J.= (D. D.), Los Angeles, Cal., bishop of the
      Roman Catholic diocese of Monterey and Los Angeles.

  =Coney, Patrick H.=, lawyer, 316 Kansas Avenue, Topeka, Kan. He
      entered the Union army in 1863, at the age of 15 years, enlisting
      in the One Hundred and Eleventh New York Infantry. He was detailed
      as dispatch bearer on General McDougall’s staff, promoted as an
      orderly dispatch bearer on Gen. Nelson A. Miles’ staff, served in
      this capacity on to Appomattox and Lee’s surrender, and was
      transferred June 5, 1865, to Company H, Fourth New York Heavy
      Artillery. He served until October 5, 1865, when he was honorably
      discharged at Hart’s Island, N. Y. He was wounded at the battle of
      Peach Orchard in front of Petersburg, Va., on June 16, 1864, and
      rejoined his command from the hospital after sixty days’
      convalescence. In addition to his law practice, he is president
      and manager of the National Investment and Development Co., which
      is engaged in the promotion and development of 11,000 acres of
      mineral, gas and oil lands in Benton County, Mo.

  =Conlon, William L.=, Portsmouth, N. H.

  =Connery, William P.=, Wheeler and Pleasant Streets, Lynn, Mass.;
      recently candidate for mayor of Lynn.

  =Connolly, Capt. James=, real estate, Coronado, Cal. He was born in
      County Cavan, Ireland, 1842; came to this country when he was but
      ten years of age, and spent much of his youth at East Dennis, Cape
      Cod, Mass. His early love for the sea was gratified later in life
      when he became captain of some of the finest deep-water ships
      sailing from Baltimore, Boston and elsewhere. His first command
      was the bark _May Queen_, a regular Baltimore and Rio packet,
      1872. He then had command of the ship _Pilgrim_ of Boston, and
      made several voyages to the East Indies. In 1884 he was given
      command of the _Charger_, a larger and finer ship than the
      _Pilgrim_, and sailed to ports in Japan. He next had command of
      the _South American_, “the Commodore’s ship,” of the Hastings
      fleet (Boston), and took her to Australia and other parts. He made
      several record voyages during his career, and some of these
      records still stand, having never been equalled. On one occasion
      he was wrecked off the coast of Africa; he and his wife upon being
      rescued were hospitably entertained by the Boers of the adjacent
      country. Returning to East Dennis, Mass., his wife’s health became
      poor and so he removed with her to Coronado, Cal., hoping that the
      change of climate would benefit her, but she died in 1901. She had
      accompanied her husband on several of his voyages, and had with
      him visited many parts of the world. Captain Connolly has written
      much and entertainingly. He has at present in manuscript form a
      novel of ocean life entitled _The Magic of the Sea_.

  =Connolly, Rev. Arthur T.=, Center and Creighton Streets, Roxbury
      (Boston), Mass.

  =Connor, Michael=, 509 Beech Street, Manchester, N. H.

  =Conway, James L.=, 113 Worth Street, New York City.

  =Cooke, Rev. Michael J.=, Fall River, Mass. (Life member of the
      Society.)

  =Cooney, Brig.-Gen. Michael= (U. S. A.), retired, 500 T Street, N. W.,
      Washington, D. C.; born in Ireland; private, corporal and
      sergeant, Company A, First United States Cavalry, December 4,
      1856, to December 4, 1861; quartermaster-sergeant, Sixth Cavalry,
      December, 1864; first lieutenant, Ninth Cavalry, July 28, 1866;
      captain, January 1, 1868; major, Fourth Cavalry, December 10,
      1888; lieutenant-colonel, Seventh Cavalry, June 2, 1897; colonel,
      Fourth Cavalry, June 9, 1899; brigadier-general, retired, April
      23, 1904.

  =Coughlin, John=, 177 Water Street, Augusta, Me.

  =Cox, Hugh M.= (M. D.), 285 St. Nicholas Avenue, New York City.

  =Cox, Michael F.= (M. D., M. R. I. A.), 26 Merrion Square, Dublin,
      Ireland.

  =Cox, Michael H.=, 54 Commerce Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Cox, William T.=, 12 South Second Street, Elizabeth, N. J., owner of
      Cox’s Towing Line; for some years chairman of the fire
      commissioners of Elizabeth; ex-chief of the Elizabeth Volunteer
      Fire Department.

  =Coyle, Rev. James=, Taunton, Mass.

  =Coyle, Rev. John D.=, 79 Davenport Avenue, New Haven, Conn.

  =Crane, Maj. John=, 8 & 10 Bridge Street, New York City; of the firm
      Crane & MacMahon, manufacturers of wheels, carriage woodstock, and
      hardwood lumber. Among offices held by him may be mentioned:
      director of the Ganesvoort Bank, New York; trustee of Emigrant
      Industrial Savings Bank; president of the Irish Emigrant Society;
      president of Ascension Conference, Society of St. Vincent de Paul;
      member of the Superior Council, Society of St. Vincent de Paul;
      chairman of the Finance Committee for Special Work, of the same
      society; vice-president of the Virginia and North Carolina Wheel
      Co., Richmond, Va.; vice-president of the St. Marys Spoke and
      Wheel Co., of St. Marys, Ohio; trustee of the Soldiers and Sailors
      Home, Bath, N. Y.; vice-president of the Society of the Army of
      the Tennessee. He is also a member of the New York Commandery,
      Military Order of the Loyal Legion, of the New York Friendly Sons
      of St. Patrick, and of other organizations. He was a commissioned
      officer during the Civil War in the Sixth and Seventeenth
      Wisconsin regiments of Infantry, saw four years of very active
      service, and was regimental and brigade adjutant for a
      considerable period.

  =Creagh, Rev. John T.= (J. U. L., S. T. L., J. C. D.), Catholic
      University, Washington, D. C.; associate professor of canon law.

  =Creamer, Walter H.=, 4 Prescott Place, Lynn, Mass. His
      great-grandfather, Edward Creamer, was born in Kinsale, Ireland,
      1756, was graduated from Trinity College, Dublin, and in 1784
      settled in Salem, Mass. He was a physician there. This Edward had
      a son George who married Hannah Gardner whose mother was Mary
      Sullivan, a sister of Gen. John Sullivan of the Revolution and of
      Gov. James Sullivan of Massachusetts. Walter H. Creamer, here
      mentioned, is a grandson of the said George and Hannah (Gardner)
      Creamer.

  =Crimmins, Cyril=, of the Crimmins Realty Co., 624 Madison Avenue, New
      York City. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Crimmins, Hon. John D.=, 40 East 68th Street, New York City; a Life
      member of the Society; president-general of the organization in
      1901, 1902 and 1905. Mr. Crimmins served as a park commissioner of
      New York City from 1883 to 1888, during which time he was
      treasurer and president of the board. He was a member of the Board
      of Visitors to West Point in 1894, and presidential elector
      (Democratic) in 1892 and 1904. He was appointed by Governor
      Roosevelt and served as a member of the Greater New York Charter
      Revision Commission. In 1894, he was a member of the New York
      State Constitutional Convention. Mr. Crimmins is a member of the
      New York Chamber of Commerce and is officially connected with many
      railway, realty and banking corporations. Among the offices to
      which he has been chosen may be mentioned: President of the Essex
      and Hudson Land Improvement Co.; honorary vice-president of the
      Trust Company of America, New York; vice-president of the Title
      Insurance Co. of New York; vice-president of the New York Mortgage
      and Security Co.; director of the Fifth Avenue Bank of New York,
      and also a director in the following companies: the Century Realty
      Co. and the Chelsea Realty Co. He is prominently identified with
      the charities of the Roman Catholic Church, as well as with
      non-sectarian charities. He is a member of the board of managers
      of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals; member of
      the executive committee of the New York State Branch of the
      American National Red Cross Society; member of the board of
      directors of the Pennsylvania, New York and Long Island Railroad
      Co.; member of the board of directors of the Metropolitan Bank;
      member of the board of managers of St. Vincent’s Hospital; member
      of the board of trustees of St. John’s Guild, and also of the
      Provident Loan Society of New York. Mr. Crimmins is also a
      director of the City and Suburban Homes Co. of New York, which has
      for its object to provide model homes at reasonable cost for
      working people. He is a member of the following clubs: Catholic,
      Metropolitan, Lawyers, Democratic, Manhattan, and of the Wee Burn
      Golf Club of which he was formerly president. He is likewise a
      member of the board of managers of the Sevilla Home for Children,
      a non-sectarian charity, and is also one of the managers of the
      Society for the Reformation of Juvenile Delinquents.

  =Crimmins, Capt. Martin L.=, U. S. A.; care of War Department,
      Washington, D. C.; a son of Hon. John D. Crimmins of New York
      City.

  =Cronin, Capt. William=, Rutland, Vt.

  =Croston, J. F.= (M. D.), 83 Emerson Street, Haverhill, Mass.

  =Cummings, Matthew J.=, overseer of the poor, 616 Eddy Street,
      Providence, R. I.

  =Cummins, Rev. John F.=, Roslindale (Boston), Mass.

  =Cunningham, James=, 277 Congress Street, Portland, Me.

  =Curran, Philip A.=, of the Curran Dry Goods Co., Waterbury, Conn.

  =Curry, Edmond J.=, 69–71 East 89th Street, New York City.

  =Daly, John J.=, 1045 Longwood Avenue, Bronx, New York City; foreman,
      U. S. Immigration buildings, Ellis Island.

  =Daly, Hon. Joseph F.= (LL. D.), Wall Street, New York City; chief
      justice of the Court of Common Pleas, New York, 1890–’96; justice
      of the New York Supreme Court, 1896–’98; member of the Board of
      Managers, Roman Catholic Orphan Asylum; member of the Advisory
      Board, St. Vincent’s Hospital; served in 1900 on the commission to
      revise the laws of Porto Rico.

  =Danaher, Hon. Franklin M.=, Albany, N. Y.; member of the State Board
      of Law Examiners; many years judge of the City Court of Albany.

  =Danvers, Robert E.=, 349–351 West 58th Street (the St. Albans), New
      York City; dealer in iron and steel.

  =Dasey, Charles V.=, Board of Trade Building, Broad Street, Boston,
      Mass.; steamship and insurance agent; general Eastern agent,
      Anchor Line S. S. Co., and of the Italian Royal Mail S. S. Co.;
      general agent, Insular Navigation Co.; general agency for ocean
      travel.

  =Davis, John H.=, assistant cashier, Seaboard National Bank, New York
      City.

  =Day, Joseph P.=, real estate, 31 Nassau Street, and 932 Eighth
      Avenue, New York City.

  =Deeves, Richard=, of Richard Deeves & Son, builders, 305–309
      Broadway, New York City. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Delehanty, Hon. F. B.=, Judges’ Chambers, Court House, City Hall
      Park, New York; a judge of the City Court.

  =Dempsey, George C.=, Lowell, Mass.

  =Dempsey, William P.=, treasurer and manager, the Dempsey Bleachery
      and Dye Works, Pawtucket, R. I.

  =DeRoo, Rev. Peter=, St. Joseph’s Church, 45 Fifteenth Street, North,
      Portland, Ore.; author of the _History of America Before
      Columbus_, a most interesting and valuable work.

  =Devlin, James H.=, 35 Parsons Street, Brighton (Boston), Mass.

  =Devlin, James H., Jr.=, lawyer, Barristers Hall, Pemberton Square,
      Boston, Mass.

  =Dixon, Richard=, insurance, 52–54 William Street, New York City.

  =Donahue, Dan A.=, 178 Essex Street, Salem, Mass.

  =Donahue, R. J.=, cashier of the National Bank of Ogdensburg, N. Y.

  =Donnelly, Hon. Thomas F.=, a justice of the New York City Court, 257
      Broadway, New York City.

  =Donoghue, D. F.= (M. D.), 240 Maple Street, Holyoke, Mass.

  =Donovan, Daniel=, 21 High Rock Street, Lynn, Mass.; an authority on
      heraldry, armoral bearings, etc.; particularly as the same relate
      to Ireland.

  =Donovan, Henry F.=, editor and proprietor _The Chicago Eagle_,
      Teutonic Building, Chicago, Ill.; late colonel and
      inspector-general, Illinois National Guard.

  =Donovan, John W.=, real estate, mortgages and insurance, 360 West
      125th Street, New York City.

  =Donovan, Dr. S. E.=, New Bedford, Mass.

  =Donovan, Col. William H.=, Lawrence, Mass.; commander of the Ninth
      Regiment, M. V. M.; served with the regiment in Cuba during the
      recent war with Spain.

  =Dooley, Michael F.=, treasurer-general of the Society, Providence, R.
      I.

  =Doran, Patrick L.=, Salt Lake City, Utah.

  =Dowd, Willis B.=, lawyer, 141 Broadway, New York City; great-grandson
      of Cornelius Dowd who came to this country about 1750 and settled
      in Moore County, N. C., where he became prominent. The family has
      attained much distinction in North Carolina.

  =Dowling, Rev. Austin=, rector of the Cathedral, Providence, R. I.

  =Downing, Bernard=, secretary to the president of the Borough of
      Manhattan, City Hall, New York City.

  =Downing, D. P.=, with National Biscuit Company, Cambridge, Mass.

  =Doyle, Alfred L.=, of John F. Doyle & Sons, real estate agents,
      brokers and appraisers, 45 William Street, New York City.

  =Doyle, James=, 50 Front Street, New York City; present oldest member
      of the flour trade in New York; member of the New York Produce
      Exchange from the beginning; member of the board of managers of
      the Exchange, 1897–1901. He and his son, Nathaniel, are associated
      in trade as James Doyle & Company.

  =Doyle, John F.=, of John F. Doyle & Sons, 45 William Street, New York
      City. (Life member of the Society.) Mr. Doyle is the senior member
      of the real estate firm of John F. Doyle & Sons. He was born in
      New York City, 1837, a son of James Doyle, who participated in the
      Irish revolution of 1798, and who came to the United States early
      in 1806. This James Doyle, the immigrant, had a son who was killed
      in the Florida war of 1837, and a grandson who fell in 1861,
      fighting for the Union. John F. Doyle, the subject of this sketch
      and member of the Society, entered the law office of Alexander
      Hamilton, grandson of the first secretary of the treasury,
      afterwards the firm of Hamilton, Rives & Rogers, and remained with
      them from 1853 to 1869, in the meantime studying law and being
      admitted to the bar in 1862. Alexander Hamilton, Francis R. Rives,
      a son of William C. Rives, of Virginia, at one time minister to
      France and senator, and Nathan Pendleton Rogers, all of the old
      Revolutionary stock, were members of the firm. Mr. Doyle’s
      management of some Wall Street properties for them at this period
      became so conspicuous that he was urged by them to assume the
      management of their estates, which he did. Shortly afterwards
      followed the acquisition of the estates of such well-known people
      as Mrs. Harriet L. Langdon, granddaughter-in-law of the first John
      Jacob Astor, John Pyne March, Mrs. Morgan L. Livingston, George L.
      Schuyler, James M. Pendleton, A. Newbold Morris, James H. Jones,
      John Steward, Jr., Royal Phelps, deceased, Royal Phelps Carroll,
      Robert S. Minturn, estate of Gertrude L. Lowndes, deceased,
      William H. King, of Newport, R. I., and others too numerous to
      mention in detail. A feature of his career as a successful manager
      lies in the fact that the business associations and connections
      formed by him in the beginning are still held intact. Among the
      notable sales made by him are those from William H. Morris to John
      Jacob Astor in 1880, conveying 150 acres of lots in the
      twenty-third ward on and adjacent to Harlem River; the great sale
      of South Brooklyn lots at Gowanus Bay in 1884. Mr. Doyle
      represents today the same old and well-known families and estates
      represented by him so many years ago. During his career Mr. Doyle
      has met and done business with some of the most notable men
      connected with families notable in American history, such as three
      of the four sons of the first Alexander Hamilton, Admiral
      Farragut, Capt. Percival Drayton, Rawlins Lowndes, of South
      Carolina, William C. Rives, U. S. senator from Virginia, at one
      time minister to France, George L. Schuyler, grandson of Philip
      Schuyler and owner of the famous yacht America, Philip Schuyler,
      his son, Henry Grinnell of Arctic fame, Robert J. and Mortimer
      Livingston, Hon. John Lee Carroll, Commodore Wm. K. Vanderbilt,
      and scores of others equally well known, besides representing
      branches now of four lineal descendants of signers of the
      Declaration of Independence. His two sons, Col. John F. Doyle,
      Jr., and Alfred L. Doyle, have been with him in business for years
      past and all three enjoy an enviable reputation for integrity,
      ability and prudence in all their undertakings.

  =Doyle, Col. John F., Jr.=, of John F. Doyle & Sons, 45 William
      Street, New York City.

  =Doyle, Nathaniel=, of James Doyle & Co., flour, etc.; 50 Front
      Street, New York City; member of the board of managers, New York
      Produce Exchange; member of the New York Club, 5th Avenue and 35th
      Street; member Veteran Association, Seventh Regiment, N. G. S. N.
      Y.

  =Drummond, M. J.=, of M. J. Drummond & Co., 182 Broadway, New York
      City. Mr. Drummond was born on February 1, 1851, in Jersey City,
      N. J., and was graduated from De La Salle Institute, New York
      City. He started in the iron pipe business in 1879, and in 1887
      organized, as senior partner, the firm of M. J. Drummond &
      Company, which has since been incorporated and is one of the most
      successful iron pipe concerns in the United States. Mr. Drummond
      has been prominent in the charitable, social and business life of
      New York for a generation. He is president of M. J. Drummond &
      Company, of the Shawmut Clay Manufacturing Company, of the
      Glamorgan Iron Works, of the Nassau County Water Company, and of
      the Green Island Water Company. As well as being a director of
      this company, he is a director, of the Nassau Union Bank and a
      trustee and member of the Executive Board of the Emigrant
      Industrial Savings Bank and the Broadway Trust Company, and he
      holds membership in the Chamber of Commerce, the New York Athletic
      Club, the Hardware Club, and the Catholic Club, and was recently
      president of the Friendly Sons of St. Patrick.

  =Duffy, P. P.=, Parsons, Labette County, Kansas.

  =Dunne, F. L.=, 328 Washington Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Dwyer, J. R.=, 732 Alpine Street, Los Angeles, Cal.

  =Dwyer, Thomas=, builder, 601 West End Avenue, New York City. (Life
      member of the Society.)

  =Editor of “The Rosary Magazine,”= Somerset, O. (Life member of the
      Society.)

  =Egan, James T.=, of the law firm, Gorman, Egan & Gorman, Banigan
      Building, Providence, R. I.

  =Egan, Rev. M. H.=, rector, Church of the Sacred Heart, Lebanon, N. H.

  =Egan, Hon. Patrick=, 18 Broadway, New York City; recently United
      States Minister to Chili.

  =Ellard, George W.=, 180 Lisbon Street, Lewiston, Me.

  =Elliott, Dr. George W.=, Immigration Office, Ellis Island, N. Y. He
      is the duly accredited representative of the Canadian Government
      at the port of New York, co-operating with the public health and
      marine hospital service of the United States in connection with
      the medical examination of aliens passing through the United
      States immigration station, Ellis Island, destined for all points
      in the Dominion of Canada. Doctor Elliott is a native of Ireland.

  =Emmet, J. Duncan= (M. D.), 103 Madison Avenue, New York City.

  =Emmet, Robert=, The Priory, Warwick, England.

  =Emmet, Thomas Addis= (M. D., LL. D.), 89 Madison Avenue, New York
      City (Life member of the Society); grand nephew of the Irish
      patriot, Robert Emmet.

  =Eustace, Hon. Alexander C.=, of the law firm A. C. & J. P. Eustace,
      334 East Water Street, Elmira, N. Y.; during many years past
      identified as attorney or counsel, with many of the most important
      litigations before the courts in southern and western New York;
      was for three years, prior to 1893, president of the New York
      State Civil Service Commission.

  =Falahee, John J.=, real estate, 120 West 59th Street, New York City.

  =Fallon, Hon. Joseph D.= (LL. D.), 789 Broadway, South Boston, Mass.;
      justice of the South Boston Municipal Court; vice-president, Union
      Institution for Savings.

  =Fallon, Hon. Joseph P.=, 1900 Lexington Avenue, New York City;
      justice of the Ninth District Municipal Court.

  =Farley, Most Rev. John M.= (D. D.), 452 Madison Ave., New York City.

  =Farrell, James P.=, superintendent of the Brooklyn Disciplinary
      Training School, 18th Avenue, between 56th and 58th streets,
      Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Farrell, John F.=, Brander-Walsh Co., 89 Worth Street, New York City.

  =Farrell, John T.= (M. D.), 16 Messer Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Farrelly, Frank T.=, Springfield News Co., Main Street, Springfield,
      Mass.

  =Farrelly, Stephen=, American News Co., New York City. (Life member of
      the Society.)

  =Feeley, William J.=, treasurer of the W. J. Feeley Co., silversmiths
      and manufacturing jewelers, 185 Eddy Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Ferguson, Hugh=, of Hugh Ferguson & Co., George Street, Charleston,
      S. C.

  =Finn, Rev. Thomas J.=, Box 242, Port Chester, N. Y.

  =Fitzgerald, Rev. D. W.=, 9 Pleasant Street, Penacook (Concord), N. H.

  =Fitzgerald, Hon. James=, New York City; a justice of the New York
      Supreme Court.

  =Fitzpatrick, Edward=, on the staff of the Louisville (Ky.) _Times_; a
      resident of New Albany, Ind.; member of the committee to select
      books for the New Albany Public Library; was, from 1878 to 1885,
      Indiana correspondent of the Louisville _Courier-Journal_,
      reporting the Legislature two terms, 1883–’85, for that paper, and
      at the same time was assistant to the chief clerk in the House of
      Representatives; was appointed a clerk in the U. S. Q. M. Depot at
      Jeffersonville, Ind., in 1885, but resigned to re-enter the employ
      of the _Courier-Journal_ as political reporter in Louisville; was
      four years on the Louisville _Post_; returned to the
      _Courier-Journal_; was transferred to the _Times_ (the afternoon
      edition of the _Courier-Journal_), and has been on that paper for
      many years past. He is a keen and forceful writer, and is one of
      the ablest men in American journalism.

  =Fitzpatrick, Thomas B.=, senior member of the firm Brown, Durrell &
      Co., importers and manufacturers, 104 Kingston Street, Boston,
      Mass.; Rand-McNally Building, Chicago, Ill., and 11–19 West 19th
      Street, New York City; president of the Union Institution for
      Savings, Boston, and a director in the United States Trust Co. of
      that city.

  =Fitzpatrick, Rev. William H.=, 2221 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester
      Centre, Mass.

  =Flannery, Capt. John=, Savannah, Ga.; of the John Flannery Co.,
      cotton factors and commission merchants; was a non-commissioned
      officer of the Irish Jasper Greens in garrison at Fort Pulaski,
      1861; was later lieutenant and captain, C. S. A., serving under
      Gen. Joe Johnston and General Hood; became a partner, in 1865, in
      the cotton firm, L. J. Guilmartin & Co., having a line of steamers
      from Charleston, S. C., to Palatka, Fla.; bought out the business
      in 1877; founded the house of John Flannery & Co.; became director
      and president of the Southern Bank of the State of Georgia; is
      ex-president of the Southern Cotton Exchange; captain, 1872–’98,
      of the Jasper Greens.

  =Fogarty, James A.=, 264 Blatchley Avenue, New Haven, Conn., recently
      a police commissioner of New Haven.

  =Fogarty, Jeremiah W.=, Registry of Deeds, Boston, Mass.

  =Fox, John J.=, 1908–1910 Bathgate Avenue, New York City.

  =Gaffney, Hon. T. St. John=, lawyer; member of the French Legion of
      Honor; 41 Riverside Drive, New York City; is now U. S.
      Consul-General, Dresden, Germany.

  =Gallagher, Patrick=, contractor and builder, 11 East 59th Street, New
      York City. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Gargan, Hon. Thomas J.=, of the law firm, Gargan, Keating & Brackett,
      Pemberton Building, Boston, Mass.; [Life member of the Society],
      and president-general of the same in 1899 and 1900; member of the
      Boston Transit Commission; director of the United States Trust
      Co.; director, the Columbian National Life Insurance Co.

  =Garrigan, Rt. Rev. Philip J.= (D. D.), bishop of the Roman Catholic
      diocese of Sioux City, Iowa.

  =Garrity, P. H.=, 221 Bank Street, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Garvan, Francis P.=, assistant district attorney, 23 Fifth Avenue,
      New York City.

  =Garvan, Hon. Patrick=, 236 Farmington Avenue, Hartford, Conn.; paper
      and paper stock. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Geoghegan, Charles A.=, 537–539 West Broadway, New York City.

  =Geoghegan, Joseph=, Salt Lake City, Utah (Life member of the
      Society); vice-president of the board of education, Salt Lake
      City; director of the Utah National Bank; director of the Utah
      Loan and Building Association; director of the Butler Liberal
      Manufacturing Co., all three concerns of Salt Lake City; also,
      director in many other corporations. He is general agent in Utah
      for Swift & Co. of Chicago; Borden’s Condensed Milk Co. of New
      York; the American Can Co. of New York, and the Pennsylvania Salt
      Mfg. Co. of Philadelphia. He is broker for the following: the
      Western Sugar Refining Co. of San Francisco, Cal.; the Utah Sugar
      Co. of Lehi, Utah; the Amalgamated Sugar Co. of Ogden, Utah; the
      Idaho Sugar Co. of Idaho Falls, Idaho, and the Fremont County
      Sugar Co. of Sugar City, Idaho.

  =Geoghegan, Joseph G.=, 20 East 73d Street, New York City. (Life
      member of the Society.)

  =Geoghegan, Walter F.=, 537–539 West Broadway, New York City.

  =Gibbons, John T.=, merchant, corner of Poydras and South Peters
      streets, New Orleans, La.; brother of Cardinal Gibbons. (Life
      member of the Society.)

  =Gillespie, George J.=, of the law firm Gillespie & O’Connor, 20–24
      Vesey St., New York City; trustee, Catholic Summer School (Cliff
      Haven); member of the board of managers of the N. Y. Roman
      Catholic Orphan Asylum; vice-president of the Particular Council,
      Society of St. Vincent de Paul, New York City; member of the N. Y.
      Board of Education; recently tax commissioner of the City of New
      York. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Gilman, John E.=, 43 Hawkins Street, Boston, Mass.; has been
      adjutant-general on the staff of the national commander-in-chief,
      Grand Army of the Republic. In August, 1862, Mr. Gilman enlisted
      in Co. E, Twelfth Massachusetts Infantry (Webster Regiment), and
      participated in campaigns under Generals Pope, McClellan,
      Burnside, Hooker and Meade up to the battle of Gettysburg, Pa.,
      where, on July 2, 1863, his right arm was shot off near the
      shoulder. Securing his discharge from the army on September 28,
      1863, he returned to Boston. In 1864, he entered the service of
      the state and served in various departments until 1883, when he
      was made settlement clerk of the directors of Public Institutions
      of Boston. He was appointed soldiers’ relief commissioner, April
      2, 1901. He has been a comrade of Posts 14, 7 and 26, G. A. R.,
      since 1868, being commander of the latter post in 1888. He was
      department inspector of the Massachusetts G. A. R. in 1895; junior
      vice-commander in 1896; senior vice-commander in 1897;
      delegate-at-large in 1898; and department commander in 1899.

  =Goff, Hon. John W.=, New York City.

  =Gorman, Dennis J.=, assessors’ office, City Hall, Boston, Mass.

  =Gorman, John F.=, lawyer, Stephen Girard Building, Philadelphia, Pa.

  =Gorman, William=, lawyer, Stephen Girard Building, Philadelphia, Pa.;
      member of the Pennsylvania Bar Association, the Pennsylvania
      Academy of Fine Arts, the American Academy of Social and Political
      Science; the Alumni Association of the University of Pennsylvania,
      and other organizations. He is officially connected with the
      Commonwealth Title Insurance and Trust Co. of Philadelphia. (Life
      member of the Society.)

  =Guilfoile, Francis P.=, lawyer, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Griffin, John C.=, insurance, Skowhegan, Me.

  =Griffin, Rt. Rev. Mgr. Thomas= (D. D.), St. John’s presbytery, 44
      Temple Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Haggerty, J. Henry=, of the Haggerty Refining Co., oils, 50 South
      Street, New York City.

  =Haigney, John=, 439 58th Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Halley, Charles V.=, 1014 East 175th Street, New York City.

  =Hanlon, Marcus=, P. O. Box 1920, New York City.

  =Hannan, Hon. John=, mayor of Ogdensburg, N. Y.; president of the
      Ogdensburg Coal and Towing Co., 44 and 46 Water Street.

  =Hanrahan, John D.= (M. D.), Rutland, Vt., a native of County
      Limerick, Ireland; was graduated in medicine from the University
      of the City of New York, 1867; in June, 1861, he was, on
      examination (not having graduated), appointed surgeon in the
      United States Navy, and served through the entire Civil War. The
      vessels on which he served did duty mostly on the rivers of
      Virginia and North Carolina, where he served with the army as well
      as the navy, thereby having the benefit and experience of both
      branches of the service, especially in the surgical line. In
      August, 1863, the vessel on which he was serving was captured at
      the mouth of the Rappahannock River and all on board made
      prisoners. They were taken overland to Richmond where they were
      confined in Libby Prison. At that time the Confederates were very
      short of surgeons and medical supplies, and he was asked if he
      would go over to Belle Island and attend the Union prisoners.
      After consulting his fellow-prisoners he consented, and for six
      weeks he attended the sick and wounded Union prisoners faithfully,
      under very great disadvantages, as the appliances were very
      limited. After that he was paroled. While a prisoner of war he was
      treated with the greatest courtesy and consideration by the
      medical staff and officers of the Confederacy. After the close of
      the war he was settled in New York City, but for nearly forty
      years has been a resident of Rutland, Vt. He was town and city
      physician of Rutland for many years. He was appointed surgeon of
      the Third Vermont Regiment, 1871, by Governor Stewart; was the
      first president of the Rutland County Medical and Surgical
      Society; has been a director and consulting surgeon of the Rutland
      (Vt.) Hospital; consulting surgeon to the Fanny Allen Hospital,
      Winooski, Vt.; a member of the Vermont Sanitary Association, and a
      member of the Vermont Society for the Prevention of Tuberculosis;
      president of Rutland Village two years and trustee eight years;
      county commissioner one year; president, United States pension
      examining board four years under President Cleveland, and
      president of the same board four years under President Harrison.
      He was postmaster of Rutland during the second term of President
      Cleveland. He has since its organization been an active member of
      the G. A. R.; surgeon of Roberts Post, the largest in Vermont; has
      served three terms as medical director of the Department; served
      on the staffs of three commanders-in-chief—Veasy, Palmer and
      Weissert; a member of Commander-in-Chief Stewart’s staff. Doctor
      Hanrahan is the author of several medical papers, has performed
      many surgical operations, and has served through several epidemics
      of smallpox and diphtheria. He was a delegate to the Democratic
      National conventions of 1884, 1888, and chairman of the Vermont
      delegation to the National Convention of 1892. Also a delegate to
      the Democratic National Convention in St. Louis, 1904, and to the
      Ancient Order of Hibernians convention in St. Louis, July 19,
      1904.

  =Harbison, Hon. Alexander=, Hartford, Conn., recently mayor of
      Hartford.

  =Harrington, Rev. J. C.=, rector of St. Joseph’s Church, Lynn, Mass.

  =Harrington, Rev. John M.=, Orono, Me.

  =Harris, Hon. Charles N.=, a New York City magistrate.

  =Harson, M. Joseph=, Catholic Club, 120 Central Park South, New York
      City.

  =Hayes, John F.= (M. D.), 15 South Elm Street, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Hayes, Hon. Nicholas J.=, sheriff, County of New York, 299 Broadway,
      New York City.

  =Hayes, Col. Patrick E.=, Pawtucket, R. I.

  =Healy, David=, 70 Jane Street, New York City; U. S. Immigration
      service.

  =Healy, John F.=, general superintendent of the Davis Coal and Coke
      Co., Thomas, Tucker County, W. Va.

  =Healy, Richard=, cloaks, suits, furs, etc., 512 Main Street,
      Worcester, Mass.

  =Hennessy, Michael E.=, on the staff of the _Daily Globe_, Boston,
      Mass.; a newspaper man of wide experience and exceptional ability.

  =Henry, Charles T.=, 120 Liberty Street, New York City.

  =Hickey, James G.=, manager of the United States Hotel, Boston, Mass.
      (Life member of the Society.)

  =Hickey, John J.=, plumbing contractor, 8 East 129th Street, New York
      City.

  =Hickey, Rev. William A.=, Clinton, Mass.

  =Higgins, James J.=, 85 Court Street, Elizabeth, N. J.

  =Hoban, Rt. Rev. M. J.= (D. D.), Scranton, Pa., bishop of the Roman
      Catholic diocese of Scranton.

  =Hoey, James J.=, real estate, insurance, etc., 879 Tenth Avenue, New
      York City.

  =Hogan, John W.=, lawyer, 4 Weybosset Street, Providence, R. I.;
      recently a candidate for Congress.

  =Holland, John P.=, 95 Nelson Place, Newark, N. J.; inventor of the
      submarine torpedo boat.

  =Horigan, Hon. Cornelius=, 229 and 231 Main Street, Biddeford, Me.; is
      treasurer of the Andrews & Horigan Co.; a member of the state
      Legislature of Maine.

  =Hughes, Rev. Christopher=, Fall River, Mass.

  =Hurley, James H.=, Union Trust Co. Building, Providence, R. I.;
      manager of the real estate department, G. L. & H. J. Gross.

  =Hurley, John E.=, 63 Washington Street, Providence, R. I.;
      vice-president and superintendent of the Remington Printing Co.;
      president, in 1904, of the Rhode Island Master Printers’
      Association.

  =Jameson, W. R.=, 1786 Bathgate Avenue, borough of the Bronx, New York
      City.

  =Jenkinson, Richard C.=, 678 High Street, Newark, N. J.; of R. C.
      Jenkinson & Co., manufacturers of metal goods; candidate for mayor
      of Newark in 1901; was president of the Newark Board of Trade in
      1898–’99 and 1900; has been a director in the Newark Gas Co.; was
      president of the New Jersey Commission to the Pan-American
      Exposition, and one of the vice-presidents of the Exposition,
      representing the state of New Jersey by appointment of Governor
      Voorhees.

  =Jennings, Michael J.=, 753 Third Avenue, New York City.

  =Johnson, James G.=, of James G. Johnson & Co., 649, 651, 653 and 655
      Broadway, New York City.

  =Jordan, Michael J.=, lawyer, 42 Court Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Joyce, Bernard J.=, Hanley Brewing Co., Providence, R. I.

  =Joyce, Harry L.=, 151 West 61st Street, New York City.

  =Joyce, John Jay=, 47 Macdougal Street, New York City.

  =Kane, John H.= (M. D.), Lexington, Mass.

  =Keane, Most Rev. John J.= (D. D.), Dubuque, Ia.; archbishop of the
      Roman Catholic archdiocese of Dubuque.

  =Kearney, James=, lawyer, 220 Broadway, New York City.

  =Keating, Patrick M.=, of the law firm Gargan, Keating & Brackett,
      Pemberton Building, Boston, Mass.

  =Keenan, John J.=, Public Library, Copley Square, Boston, Mass.

  =Kehoe, John F.=, 26 Broadway, New York City; officially connected
      with many corporations. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Kelly, Eugene=, Templecourt Building, New York City.

  =Kelly, John Forrest= (Ph. D.), Pittsfield, Mass.; born near
      Carrick-on-Suir, Ireland. He was educated in Stevens Institute of
      Technology, Hoboken, N. J., received the degree of B. L. in 1878
      and that of Ph. D. in 1881. His first occupation was as assistant
      to Thomas A. Edison, in Menlo Park laboratory, his work then
      principally relating to the chemistry of rare earths. Late in 1879
      Mr. Kelly became electrical engineer of the New York branch of the
      Western Electric Company. This was the time when the telephone was
      being generally introduced, and when dynamos were being first
      applied to telegraphic purposes. In the construction and
      installment of instruments for telegraphy and telephones and of
      such measuring instruments as were then known, Mr. Kelly received
      a thorough training. In 1882 he became laboratory assistant to
      Edward Weston, then chief electrician of the United States
      Electric Lighting Company, and, with the exception of a year which
      he spent in connection with the Remingtons, Mr. Kelly continued
      his association with Mr. Weston until July, 1886. Some of the most
      important work, such as the research which ended in the discovery
      of high resistance alloys of very low or even negative temperature
      co-efficients, were substantially carried out by Mr. Kelly under
      general directions from Mr. Weston, whom Mr. Kelly succeeded as
      chief electrician of the United States Electric Lighting Company,
      which, in 1889, passed to the Westinghouse interests; but Mr.
      Kelly retained his position as chief electrician until January,
      1892, when he resigned to join William Stanley in experimental
      work. The work done by Mr. Kelly, in this connection, gave a great
      impetus to the alternating current business. Mr. Kelly’s inventive
      work is partially represented by eighty patents. The art of
      building transformers and generators of alternating currents was
      revolutionized, and Mr. Kelly and his colleagues were the first to
      put polyphase motors into actual commercial service. That success
      naturally led to long-distance transmission work, and the first
      long-distance transmission plants in California (indeed the first
      in the world), were undertaken on Mr. Kelly’s recommendation and
      advice. He was the first to make a hysteretically stable steel, a
      matter of vastly more importance than the comparatively
      spectacular transmission work. Mr. Kelly at present occupies the
      position of president of the John F. Kelly Engineering Company,
      president of the Cokel Company and president of the Telelectric
      Company, as well as president of the Conchas River Power Company
      and director of the Southwestern Exploration Company. The Cokel
      Company is organized to exploit the invention of Mr. E. W. Cooke,
      by means of which foodstuffs may be perfectly dehydrated, losing
      on the average ninety per cent in weight. Foods dehydrated by this
      process, although free from all chemical preservatives, are
      entirely stable, and yet preserve their pristine freshness through
      extremes of temperature, and when served are indistinguishable
      from fresh foods of the ordinary type. The Telelectric Company is
      organized for the manufacture of electric piano players, which are
      either entirely automatic or entirely controllable at will. Mr.
      Kelly was married to Miss Helen Fischer, in New York City, in
      1892, and they have two children—Eoghan and Domnall. Mr. Kelly is
      a thorough and unswerving Irish Nationalist, and his splendid
      generosity to the cause is well known.

  =Kelly, Michael F.= (M. D.), Fall River, Mass.

  =Kelly, P. J.=, vice-president of the Hens-Kelly Co., Main Street,
      West Mohawk Street, and Pearl Street, Buffalo, N. Y.

  =Kelly, T. P.=, 544 West 22d Street, New York City; of T. P. Kelly &
      Co., manufacturers of black leads, foundry facings, supplies, etc.

  =Kelly, William J.=, 9 Dove Street, Newburyport, Mass.

  =Kelly, William J.=, insurance, 3 Market Square, Portsmouth, N. H.

  =Kenah, John F.=, city clerk, Elizabeth, N. J.

  =Kennedy, Charles F.=, Brewer, Me.

  =Kennedy, Daniel=, of the Kennedy Valve Manufacturing Co., Coxsackie,
      N. Y.

  =Kenney, James W.=, Park Brewery, Terrace Street, Roxbury (Boston),
      Mass.; vice-president and director, Federal Trust Co., Boston.

  =Kenney, Thomas=, 143 Summer Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Kenney, Thomas F.= (M. D.), Vienna, Austria.

  =Kenny, W. J. K.=, 44 Broad Street, New York City.

  =Kerby, John E.=, architect, 481 Fifth Avenue, New York City.

  =Kiernan, Patrick=, 265 West 43d Street, New York City.

  =Kilmartin, Thomas J.= (M. D.), Waterbury, Conn.

  =Kilroy, Philip= (M. D.), Springfield, Mass.

  =Kinsela, John F.=, 509 Gorham Street, Lowell, Mass.

  =Knights of St. Patrick=, San Francisco, Cal. (Life membership.) Care
      of John Mulhern, 25th and Hampshire streets, San Francisco.

  =Lamb, Matthew B.=, 516 Main Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Lamson, Col. Daniel S.=, Weston, Mass.; Lieutenant-Colonel commanding
      Sixteenth Regiment (Mass.), 1861; A. A. G., Norfolk, 1862; served
      on staff of General Hooker; is a member of the Society of Colonial
      Wars, Sons of the American Revolution, and Military Order of the
      Loyal Legion; one of his ancestors landed at Ipswich, Mass., in
      1632, and received a grant of 350 acres; another ancestor, Samuel,
      of Reading, Mass., participated in King Philip’s War and had a son
      in the expedition of 1711. Another member of the family, Samuel of
      Weston, commanded a company at Concord, Mass., April 19, 1775, and
      was major and colonel of the Third Middlesex Regiment for many
      years, dying in 1795.

  =Lannon, Joseph F.=, of Jos. F. Lannon & Co., general merchandise, 68
      Main Street, Susquehanna, Pa.

  =Lavelle, John=, Inquiry Division, Post Office, Cleveland, O.

  =Lawler, Joseph A.=, 308 West 14th Street, New York City.

  =Lawler, Thomas B.=, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York City; of Ginn &
      Company, publishers; member of the American Oriental Society and
      of the Archæological Society of America.

  =Lawless, Hon. Joseph T.=, lawyer, Norfolk, Va.; recently secretary of
      state, Virginia; now a colonel on the staff of the governor of
      Virginia.

  =Lawlor, P. J.=, 417 East Main Street, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Lawlor, Thomas F.=, lawyer, 65 Bank Street, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Leahy, Matthew W.=, 257 Franklin Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Lee, Hon. Thomas Z.=, of the law firm Barney & Lee, Industrial Trust
      Building, Providence, R. I.

  =Lenehan, John J.=, of the law firm Lenehan & Dowley, 71 Nassau
      Street, New York City. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Lenehan, Rev. B. C.= (V. G.), Fort Dodge, Iowa.

  =Lenihan, Rt. Rev. M. C.=, bishop of the Roman Catholic diocese of
      Great Falls, Mont.

  =Lennox, George W.=, manufacturer, Haverhill, Mass.

  =Leonard, Peter F.=, 343 Harvard Street, Cambridge, Mass.

  =Linehan, John J.=, Linehan Corset Co., Worcester, Mass.

  =Linehan, Rev. T. P.=, Biddeford, Me.

  =Lonergan, Thomas S.=, journalist, 658 East 149th Street, New York
      City.

  =Loughlin, Peter J.=, 150 Nassau Street, New York City.

  =Lovell, David B.= (M. D.), 32 Pearl Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Luddy, Timothy F.=, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Lynch, Eugene=, 24 India Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Lynch, J. H.=, 812 Eighth Avenue, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Lynch, John E.=, school principal, Worcester, Mass.

  =Lynch, Thomas J.=, lawyer, Augusta, Me.; was city clerk of Augusta,
      1884 and 1885; postmaster of Augusta from 1894 to 1898; and
      trustee of the Public Library; one of the water commissioners; a
      director of the Granite National Bank; trustee of the Kennebec
      Savings Bank; trustee of the Augusta Trust Company; president of
      the Augusta Loan & Building Association; director of the Augusta,
      Winthrop & Gardiner Railway; director of the Augusta Real Estate
      Association; and trustee of many estates.

  =Lynn, John=, 48 Bond Street, New York City.

  =Lynn, Hon. Wauhope=, a justice of the Municipal Court of the city of
      New York, 128 Prince Street, New York City.

  =Lyon, James B.=, president of the J. B. Lyon Company, printers,
      publishers, and book manufacturers, Albany, N. Y.

  =MacDonnell, John T. F.=, paper manufacturer, Holyoke, Mass.

  =MacDwyer, Patrick S.=, 248 East 23d Street, New York City.

  =McAdoo, Hon. William=, 30 Broad Street, New York City, recently
      police commissioner of the City of New York; ex-member of
      Congress; ex-assistant secretary of the navy.

  =McAleenan, Arthur=, 131 West 69th Street, New York City.

  =McAleer, George= (M. D.), Worcester, Mass.

  =McAlevy, John F.=, salesman, 26–50 North Main Street, Pawtucket, R.
      I.

  =McBride, D. H.=, 10 Barclay Street, New York City.

  =McCaffrey, Hugh=, manufacturer, Fifth and Berks streets,
      Philadelphia, Pa. (Life member of the Society.)

  =McCanna, Francis I.=, lawyer, Industrial Trust Building, Providence,
      R. I.

  =McCarrick, James W.=, general southern agent, Clyde Steamship Co.,
      Norfolk, Va. Mr. McCarrick is a veteran of the Civil War. He was
      transferred, 1861, from Twelfth Virginia Regiment to North
      Carolina gunboat _Winslow_, and appointed master’s mate.
      Transferred to Confederate navy with that steamer, and ordered to
      Confederate steamer _Seabird_, at Norfolk navy yard. Attached to
      _Seabird_ until latter was sunk. Taken prisoner, Elizabeth City,
      N. C. Paroled February, 1862. Exchanged for officer of similar
      rank captured from United States ship _Congress_. Promoted to
      master and ordered to navy yard, Selma, Ala. Served later on
      Confederate steamships _Tuscaloosa_, _Baltic_ and _Tennessee_ at
      Mobile, and in Mobile Bay, and on steamer _Macon_, at Savannah,
      and on Savannah River. Detailed to command water battery at Shell
      Bluff, below Augusta, after surrender of Savannah. Paroled from
      steamship _Macon_ at Augusta, Ga., after Johnson’s surrender. Mr.
      McCarrick is president of the Virginia State Board of Pilot
      Commissioners; president of the Board of Trade of Norfolk, Va.;
      first vice-president of the Virginia Navigation Co.; commissioner
      representing the state of Virginia in the management of the
      Jamestown Exposition held in 1907; and was president of the
      Suburban & City Railway and chairman of the executive committee of
      the Norfolk Street Railway until these two properties were
      consolidated and sold to outside parties.

  =McCarthy, Charles, Jr.=, Portland, Me.

  =McCarthy, George W.=, of Dennett & McCarthy, dry goods, Portsmouth,
      N. H.

  =McCarthy, M. R. F.=, 82 Court Street, Binghamton, N. Y.; a
      commissioner of the department of Public Instruction.

  =McCarthy, Patrick J.=, lawyer, Industrial Trust Building, Providence,
      R. I.; has been a member of the General Assembly of Rhode Island.

  =McCaughan, Rev. John P.=, St. Paul’s Church, Warren, Mass.

  =McCaughey, Bernard=, of Bernard McCaughey & Co., house furnishers,
      Pawtucket, R. I.

  =McClean, Rev. Peter H.=, Milford, Conn.

  =McCloud, William J.=, contractor, Jefferson Avenue, Elizabeth, N. J.

  =McClure, David=, lawyer, 22 William Street, New York City. Mr.
      McClure was admitted to the bar in December, 1869, in New York
      City, where he has since resided. His practice has brought him
      very prominently before the courts and public during the last
      thirty-six years as counsel in cases which have attracted much
      attention. He has been counsel in many contested will cases,
      including those of Merril, Schuyler Skatts, Charles B. Beck and
      Mary Johnson. In the Livingston, De Meli and General Burnside
      litigation he was also prominent. He has been connected with many
      large corporation foreclosure suits, including those of the Denver
      Water Company, the New York & Northern Railroad Company, Omaha
      Water Company, the Toledo, Ann Arbor & Northern Michigan, the
      Northern Pacific, the New York, Lake Erie & Western, the Oregon
      Railway & Navigation Company, the Oregon Improvement Company, the
      Chicago & Northern Pacific Company, the Bankers and Merchants’
      Telegraph Company, and the Memphis & Charleston Railroad Company.
      He is regarded as one of the most successful trial lawyers at the
      bar in New York. Mr. McClure for more than a quarter of a century
      has been counsel for the Farmers Loan & Trust Company, the oldest
      and largest trust company in the United States, organized in 1821;
      and for many years of the Consolidated Gas Company, one of the
      largest public service corporations in the country. He is also
      counsel for the West Side Savings Bank, several fire insurance
      companies and other banks. He was one of the counsel for the
      Mutual Life Insurance Company during the presidency of F. S.
      Winston. For years he was a director in the Lawyers Surety
      Company, and he is on the board of the Title Insurance Company of
      New York. He was a prominent and active member of the State
      Constitution Convention of 1894, in which body he introduced and
      carried through the amendment providing for protection of the
      forests of New York. He years ago declined elevation to the bench
      of the Court of Appeals, the highest court in the state of New
      York, and several times to other positions; also appointment to
      the offices of corporation counsel of the city of New York, and
      district attorney of the United States. Mr. McClure was appointed,
      in 1893, receiver of the National Bank of Deposit, in the city of
      New York, and in spite of the stringent financial condition which
      prevailed during the summer of that year, dividends aggregating
      seventy-five per cent were paid within three months. The entire
      indebtedness, principal and interest, was paid and the
      receivership closed out within one year. In 1892 he was a delegate
      from the state of New York to the National Democratic Convention
      which, at Chicago, nominated Grover Cleveland as candidate for the
      office of president of the United States, and during the campaign
      of that year he was much discussed by the press of New York as the
      probable nominee of his party for the office of mayor of the city.
      In that year he was designated by the General Term of the Supreme
      Court, chairman of the first commission appointed to determine
      whether a subway passing under Broadway and other streets through
      the city should be constructed, his associates being Robert
      Maclay, president of the Knickerbocker Trust Company, and Benjamin
      Perkins. Prior to the adoption by the United States government of
      the Panama Canal project, and during the presidency of Mr.
      McKinley, one of the largest, if not the largest, syndicates of
      moneyed men ever gathered together obtained a concession from the
      government of Nicaragua for the construction of a canal known as
      the Nicaragua Canal. This syndicate, which proposed to build the
      canal without government aid, was composed of the Messrs.
      Vanderbilt, Astor, Rockefeller, Mills, Stillman, Grace, Crimmins,
      and others of equal standing, and was represented before the
      committee of Congress upon the question of recognition and
      protection, by Mr. McClure as its counsel, he having organized the
      corporation under which it was proposed to operate. Mr. McClure is
      a member of the Manhattan, New York Athletic and other clubs, and
      the Bar Association; of which he has been a member of the
      judiciary and other committees. He has also been honored with the
      presidency of the Metropolitan Surety Company.

  =McConway, William=, of the McConway & Torley Co., Pittsburg, Pa.
      (Life member of the Society.)

  =McCormick, Edward R.=, 15 West 38th Street, New York City.

  =McCormick, James W.=, of the Judkins & McCormick Co., importers of
      millinery goods, 10–16 West 20th Street, New York City; residence,
      79 New England Avenue, Summit, N. J.

  =McCoy, Rev. John J.= (LL. D.), rector, St. Ann’s Church, Worcester,
      Mass.

  =McCready, Rt. Rev. Mgr. Charles=, 329 West 42d Street, New York City.

  =McCreery, Robert=, room 427, Produce Exchange, New York City.

  =McCullough, John=, 55 Maxfield Street, New Bedford, Mass.

  =McDonald, Capt. Mitchell C.=, a pay director in the navy; is at
      present stationed at the Naval Home, Philadelphia, Pa.

  =McDonnell, Robert E.=, lawyer, 38 Park Row, New York City.

  =McDonough, Hon. John J.=, Fall River, Mass.; justice of the second
      district court of Bristol County, Mass.

  =McElroy, Rev. Charles J.=, rector, St. Augustine’s Church,
      Bridgeport, Conn.

  =McGann, James E.=, real estate, 902 Chapel Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =McGann, Col. James H.=, Providence, R. I.

  =McGauran, Michael S.= (M. D.), 258 Broadway, Lawrence, Mass.

  =McGillicuddy, Hon. D. J.=, of the law firm McGillicuddy & Morey,
      Lewiston, Me.; ex-mayor of Lewiston.

  =McGinn, P. F.=, 79 Friendship Street, Providence, R. I.

  =McGinness, Brig.-Gen. John R.= (U. S. A.), retired, Virginia Club,
      Norfolk, Va.; born in Ireland; cadet at United States Military
      Academy, July 1, 1859; first lieutenant of ordnance, June 11,
      1863; captain, February 10, 1869; major, June 1, 1881;
      lieutenant-colonel, July 7, 1898; colonel, June 14, 1892; retired
      with the rank of brigadier-general, September 17, 1904.

  =McGolrick, Rev. E. J.=, 84 Herbert Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =McGolrick, Rt. Rev. James= (D. D.), bishop of the Roman Catholic
      diocese of Duluth, Minn. (Life member of the Society.)

  =McGovern, James=, 6 Wall Street, New York City; of Benedict, Drysdale
      & Co. (Life member of the Society.)

  =McGovern, Joseph P.=, of J. P. McGovern & Bro., fur brokers, 7 and 9
      Waverly Place, New York City.

  =McGowan, Rear-Admiral John=, U. S. N. (retired), 1739 N Street, N.
      W., Washington, D. C. (Life member of the Society.) He was born at
      Port Penn, Del., August 4, 1843. He is the son of John and
      Catherine (Caldwell) McGowan. He was educated in the public
      schools of Philadelphia, Pa., 1848–’53, and in private schools in
      Elizabeth, N. J., 1854–’59. Entering the navy, he was appointed
      acting master’s mate, March 8, 1862; was promoted to acting master
      May 8, 1862, and ordered to command the U. S. S. _Wyandank_ in the
      Potomac flotilla. He served on the Potomac and Rappahannock rivers
      until February, 1863, when he was detached from the _Wyandank_ and
      ordered to the _Florida_ as navigator. He served on the _Florida_
      in the blockade off Wilmington, N. C., until October, 1864, when
      the ship went to New York for repairs. In November, of the same
      year, he was detached from the _Florida_ and ordered to the U. S.
      S. _State of Georgia_ as navigator; arrived off Wilmington, N. C.,
      the day after the capture of Fort Fisher, his ship being then
      ordered to reinforce the fleet off Charleston, S. C. While there
      he took part in the Bulls Bay Expedition, which was one of the
      causes of the evacuation of Charleston by the Confederates. Soon
      after the evacuation, the _State of Georgia_ was ordered to
      Aspinwall (Colon) to protect American interests on the Isthmus of
      Panama. Before sailing for Aspinwall, McGowan succeeded Lieutenant
      Manly as executive officer of the ship. In November, 1865, he was
      ordered to the U. S. S. _Monongahela_ as watch and division
      officer; served on the _Monongahela_ in the West Indies until
      January, 1867, when he was detached and, a few days later, joined
      the U. S. S. _Tacony_, Commander Roe, fitting out for duty in the
      Gulf Squadron. He was at Vera Cruz nearly all the summer of 1867,
      which witnessed the fall of Maximilian’s empire. After the death
      of Maximilian, and the surrender of Vera Cruz to the Liberals, the
      _Tacony_ returned to Pensacola, Fla., but yellow fever breaking
      out aboard, the ship went to Portsmouth, N. H., where, after
      undergoing quarantine, the officers were detached and ordered to
      their homes the latter part of September, 1867. In October of the
      same year, McGowan was ordered to duty on board the receiving ship
      at the Philadelphia navy yard. He commanded the U. S. S.
      _Constellation_ there, and was afterward executive officer of the
      frigate _Potomac_, also a receiving ship, at Philadelphia. In
      March, 1868, while on the _Potomac_, he received a commission as
      master in the regular navy, and in October, 1868, was ordered to
      duty with the Asiatic fleet. On reporting to the admiral, he was
      ordered to duty as executive officer of the U. S. S. _Unadilla_;
      succeeded to the command of the _Unadilla_ in June, 1869, and in
      November of that year was detached from the _Unadilla_ and ordered
      to the U. S. S. _Iroquois_; returned in her to the United States,
      the ship going out of commission in April, 1870. In April, 1870,
      he was promoted to be lieutenant-commander and while in that grade
      served on the double-turreted monitor _Terror_, the _Wachusett_,
      _Juniata_ and _Marion_ as executive officer, and at the League
      Island, Philadelphia and Brooklyn navy yards. In January, 1887, he
      was promoted to commander; commanded the _Swatara_, _St. Mary’s_,
      _Portsmouth_ and _Alliance_, and was also commandant of the naval
      training station at Newport, R. I., from December, 1896, to July,
      1899. He was promoted captain, February, 1899, and in August took
      command of the U. S. S. _Monadnock_ at Manila. In November, 1900,
      he was ordered to duty as commandant of the naval station at Key
      West, Fla. In April, 1901, he was detached and ordered before the
      retiring board. He was retired, with the rank of rear admiral, in
      April, 1901. In October, 1871, he wedded Evelyn Manderson of
      Philadelphia. Admiral McGowan is a member of the military order of
      the Loyal Legion, of the Order of Foreign Wars, the Sons of the
      Revolution, and of the Society of Marine Engineers and Naval
      Architects. He is also a member of the following clubs: the
      Metropolitan and Chevy Chase of Washington, D. C.; the Rittenhouse
      of Philadelphia, the Union of New York, and the New York Yacht
      Club. Admiral McGowan’s father, Capt. John McGowan, was appointed
      a lieutenant in the revenue cutter service by President Andrew
      Jackson. He was at Charleston, S. C., during the nullification
      period, served in the Seminole War, in the War with Mexico, and in
      the Civil War. He commanded the steamer _Star of the West_ in the
      attempt to reinforce Fort Sumter in 1861. He died in January,
      1891, aged 85 years.

  =McGowan, P. F.=, manufacturer, 224 East 12th Street, New York City.
      (Life member of the Society.) President of the board of aldermen.
      Born in Lebanon, Conn., in 1852; went to New York City in 1877 and
      subsequently engaged in the manufacturing business, in which he is
      still interested. On January 1, 1900, was appointed by Mayor Van
      Wyck as a commissioner of education for a term of three years;
      appointed by Mayor McClellan as a commissioner of education, July
      12, 1904, to fill the unexpired term of President H. A. Rogers,
      and while serving in that capacity was, in 1905, elected president
      of the board of aldermen for the term expiring January 1, 1910.
      Mr. McGowan is active in a number of benevolent and fraternal
      societies. He was a supreme representative of the Royal Arcanum
      and supreme councilor of the Loyal Association. He is a member of
      the Manhattan Club, of the Friendly Sons of St. Patrick and of the
      Pensacola Club, of the Fourteenth Assembly District, where he
      resides. He is a trustee in St. Ann’s Roman Catholic Church, New
      York Polyclinic Hospital and the West Side Savings Bank.

  =McGuire, Edward J.=, lawyer, 52 Wall Street, New York City.

  =McGurrin, F. E.=, of F. E. McGurrin & Co., investment bankers,
      Security Trust Building, Salt Lake City, Utah; president of the
      Salt Lake Security & Trust Co.

  =McIntyre, John F.=, of the law firm Cantor, Adams & McIntyre, 25
      Broad Street, New York City.

  =McKelleget, Richard J.=, of the law firm R. J. & G. F. McKelleget,
      Pemberton Building, Boston, Mass.

  =McLaughlin, Henry V.= (M. D.), 40 Kent Street, Brookline, Mass.

  =McLaughlin, John=, builder, 348 East 81st Street, New York City.

  =McLaughlin, Marcus J.=, 250 West 25th Street, New York City.

  =McLaughlin, Thomas F.=, 19 East 87th Street, New York City.

  =McMahon, James=, 87 McDonough Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =McMahon, Rev. John W.= (D. D.), rector of St. Mary’s Church,
      Charlestown (Boston), Mass.

  =McManus, Col. John=, 87 Dorrance Street, Providence, R. I.; was
      appointed colonel of the Rhode Island Guards Regiment by Governor
      Van Zandt, in 1887; was one of the commissioners to revise the
      militia laws of the state; aide-de-camp, with the rank of colonel,
      on the staff of Governor Davis of Rhode Island; has been
      prominently identified with all movements for the betterment of
      Ireland—his native land; is of the firm John McManus & Co.,
      prominent merchant tailors of Providence.

  =McManus, Michael=, of McManus & Co., clothiers, Fall River, Mass.

  =McManus, Rev. Michael T.=, rector of St. Mary’s Church of the
      Assumption, Brookline, Mass.

  =McMullen, John R.=, lawyer, 60 Wall Street, New York City.

  =McOwen, Anthony=, 515 Wales Avenue, borough of the Bronx, New York
      City.

  =McPartland, John E.=, Park Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =McQuade, E. A.=, 75–77 Market Street, Lowell, Mass.

  =McQuaid, Rev. William P.=, rector of St. James’ Church, Harrison
      Avenue, Boston, Mass.

  =McSweeney, Edward F.=, _Evening Traveler_, Summer Street, Boston,
      Mass.

  =McTighe, P. J.=, McTighe Grocery Co., wholesale grocers, Fayette
      Street, Binghamton, N. Y.

  =McWalters, John P.=, 141 Broadway, New York City.

  =Magrane, P. B.=, dry goods merchant, Lynn, Mass.; and president of
      the James A. Houston Co., Boston.

  =Magrath, Patrick F.=, 244 Front Street, Binghamton, N. Y. (Life
      member of the Society.)

  =Maguire, P. J.=, 223 Third Avenue, New York City.

  =Maher, Stephen J.= (M. D.), 212 Orange Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Mahony, William H.=, dry goods, 844 Eighth Avenue, New York City.
      (Life member of the Society.)

  =Malloy, Gen. A. G.=, El Paso, Texas; a veteran of the Mexican and
      Civil wars; during the latter conflict he was successively major,
      colonel and brigadier-general; has been collector of the port of
      Galveston.

  =Maloney, Cornelius=, publisher of the _Daily Democrat_, Waterbury,
      Conn.

  =Maloney, Thomas E.= (M. D.), North Main Street, Fall River, Mass.

  =Marshall, Rev. George F.=, rector of St. Paul’s Church, Milford, N.
      H.

  =Martin, James=, recently managing editor, _New York Tribune_, New
      York City; now editor of the Newark (N. J.) _Advertiser_.

  =Martin, Hon. John B.=, penal institutions commissioner, 762 Fourth
      Street, South Boston, Mass.

  =Meade, Richard W.=, 125 East 24th Street, New York City; son of the
      first president-general of the Society.

  =Milholland, John E.=, Witherspoon Building, Philadelphia, Pa.;
      president of the Batcheller Pneumatic Tube Co., of Philadelphia;
      president of the Pneumatic Dispatch Manufacturing Co., of
      Pennsylvania; director in the Pearsall Pneumatic Tube and Power
      Co., of New York, and a director in the Pneumatic Transit Co., of
      New Jersey. Under him the successful pneumatic tube of the large
      diameter has been constructed, and it is largely due to his energy
      and effort that the U. S. post-office department now considers a
      part of its general delivery system the pneumatic tube service. He
      is a member of the Transportation Club of New York, the New York
      Press Club, the Republican Club, the Metropolitan Museum of Art,
      the American Museum of Natural History, and a number of other
      organizations.

  =Moloney, Fred G.=, Ottawa, Ill.

  =Moloney, Hon. Maurice T.=, lawyer, rooms 513–515 Moloney Building,
      Ottawa, Ill. He is a native of County Kerry, Ireland; came to the
      United States in 1867; graduated in law from the University of
      Virginia, class of 1871; admitted to the Virginia bar; removed to
      Illinois and was admitted to the bar of that state; served as city
      attorney of Ottawa, Ill., in 1879–’80 and 1881; was elected
      state’s attorney in 1884 and served four years; was elected
      attorney-general of Illinois and while in this position vigorously
      prosecuted illegal trusts and made a national reputation through
      his work; became mayor of Ottawa.

  =Molony, Henry A.=, of Molony & Carter, 16 New Street, Charlestown, S.
      C.

  =Monaghan, Hon. James Charles=, professor in the University of Notre
      Dame, Indiana; recently of the U. S. Department of Commerce and
      Labor, Washington, D. C.; formerly U. S. consul at Mannheim and at
      Chemnitz; recently professor of commerce, University of Wisconsin.

  =Montfort, Richard=, Louisville, Ky.; chief engineer of the Louisville
      & Nashville R. R.

  =Montgomery, Gen. Phelps=, 39 Church Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Moran, Col. James=, Providence, R. I.; a veteran of the Civil War. He
      was appointed second lieutenant in the Third Regiment, Rhode
      Island Volunteers, by Special Orders 53, A. G. O., R. I., August
      27, 1861; was commissioned second lieutenant, Fifth Rhode Island
      Heavy Artillery, November 5, 1861; mustered in December 16, 1861;
      in command of Company A, from August 8, 1862, until September 20,
      1862; assumed command of Company D, September 26, 1862; was
      commissioned captain and mustered in as such February 14, 1863; on
      general court martial, July 1863; in command of Fort Amory, at
      Newberne, N. C., from September 1, 1863, until October 15, 1863;
      assumed command of post at Hatteras Inlet, N. C., April 21, 1864;
      in command of forts Foster and Parks, at Roanoke Island, from May
      2, 1864, until January, 1865; mustered out January 17, 1865. In
      May, 1873, he was commissioned colonel of the Rhode Island Guards
      Regiment, and in June, 1887, became colonel of the Second
      Regiment, Brigade of Rhode Island Militia.

  =Moran, James= (M. D.), 345 West 58th Street, New York City.

  =Morgan, John=, 44 West 46th Street, New York City.

  =Moriarty, John=, Broadway, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Morrissey, Very Rev. Andrew= (C. S. C., D. D., LL. D.), University of
      Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Ind.

  =Moseley, Edward A.=, Washington, D. C., president-general of the
      Society in 1897 and 1898. He succeeded to the position, in the
      former year, on the death of Admiral Meade, who was the first
      president-general of the organization. Mr. Moseley is secretary of
      the U. S. Interstate Commerce Commission. He is ninth in descent
      from Lieut. Thaddeus Clark, who came from Ireland, and died in
      Portland, Me., May 16, 1690. Clark was lieutenant of a company of
      men engaged in the defence of Falmouth, now Portland, during the
      Indian War. He fell into ambuscade with his company while making a
      reconnoitre, and was killed with twelve of his men. Mr. Moseley is
      also a descendant of Deputy-Governor Cleeves (or Cleaves), a
      founder of Portland, formerly Falmouth, and is sixth in descent
      from Lieut. John Brown of Belfast, Me., who came with his father
      from Londonderry, Ire., and was one of the settlers of
      Londonderry, N. H.; Brown was chairman of the first board of
      selectmen of Belfast, Me., chosen November 11, 1773, ’74 and ’75;
      he removed from Londonderry, N. H. While residing there he had
      been a commissioned officer in the Provincial Army, and had served
      in the French War. Mr. Moseley is also of patriotic Revolutionary
      stock, and is a member of the Cincinnati.

  =Moynahan, Bartholomew=, lawyer, 120 Broadway, New York City; official
      stenographer to the New York Supreme Court.

  =Mullen, John F.=, 26 Trask Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Murphy, D. P., Jr.=, 31 Barclay Street, New York City.

  =Murphy, Edward J.=, of the Edward J. Murphy Co., real estate brokers,
      Springfield, Mass.

  =Murphy, Frank J.=, 33 Loring Avenue, Winchester, Mass.

  =Murphy, Fred C.=, of the Edward J. Murphy Co., Springfield, Mass.

  =Murphy, James=, 42 Westminster Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Murphy, James R.=, lawyer, 27 School Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Murray, John F.=, captain of police, Cambridge, Mass.; residence, 9
      Avon Street.

  =Murray, Hon. Lawrence O.= (LL. D.), assistant secretary, U. S.
      Department of Commerce and Labor, Washington, D. C. He is a lawyer
      by profession. He first went to Washington as secretary to William
      Edmund Curtis, assistant secretary of the treasury. Subsequently,
      he held other positions in the treasury, including that of chief
      of division, and, from September 1, 1898, to June 27, 1899, that
      of deputy comptroller of the currency. He left the government
      employ to become the trust officer of the American Trust Company,
      continuing in that place for three years. He then went to Chicago
      as secretary of the Central Trust Company of Illinois and served
      there for two years before becoming assistant secretary of
      commerce and labor.

  =Murray, Patrick=, insurance, 318 West 52d Street, New York City.

  =Murray, Thomas Hamilton=, Seaview, Plymouth County, Mass.;
      secretary-general of the Society; a newspaper man of many years’
      experience, during which he has been editorially connected with
      journals in Boston and Lawrence, Mass., Providence, R. I., and
      Bridgeport and Meriden, Conn.; has devoted much attention to
      historical research, particularly in relation to the Irish element
      in American history, and has delivered addresses on the subject
      before the New England Historic Genealogical Society; the Rhode
      Island Historical Society; the Phi Kappa Sigma of Brown
      University; the Boston Charitable Irish Society (founded 1737),
      and other organizations; is the author of a number of papers,
      pamphlets and books.

  =Neagle, Rev. Richard=, Malden, Mass.

  =Noonan, Daniel A.=, 725 Broadway, New York City.

  =O’Brien, Hon. C. D.=, lawyer, Globe Building, St. Paul, Minn.;
      prosecuting attorney of Ramsey County, Minn., from 1874–’78;
      assistant U. S. district attorney from 1870–’73; mayor of St. Paul
      from 1883–’85.

  =O’Brien, Dennis F.=, lawyer, 106 West 92d Street, New York City.

  =O’Brien, Rev. James J.=, 185 Summer Street, Somerville, Mass.; a son
      of the late Mayor Hugh O’Brien of Boston, Mass.

  =O’Brien, John D.=, Bank of Minnesota Building, St. Paul, Minn.; of
      the law firm Stevens, O’Brien, Cole & Albrecht.

  =O’Brien, Dr. Michael C.=, 161 West 122nd Street, New York City.

  =O’Brien, Hon. Morgan J.= (LL. D.), 729 Park Avenue, New York City;
      trustee of the New York Public Library; former presiding justice
      of the appellate division of the New York Supreme Court, now
      senior member of the law firm of O’Brien, Boardman, Platt & Holly,
      and associated with Grover Cleveland and George Westinghouse as a
      trustee of the Ryan stock in the Equitable Life Assurance
      Association.

  =O’Brien, Patrick=, of Driscoll & O’Brien, contractors, 399 South
      Broadway, Lawrence, Mass.

  =O’Callaghan, Rt. Rev. Mgr. Denis= (D. D.), rector of St. Augustine’s
      Church, South Boston, Mass.

  =O’Connell, Rt. Rev. Mgr. Denis Joseph= (S. T. D.), rector of the
      Catholic University, Washington, D. C.

  =O’Connell, John=, Flat Iron Building, New York City.

  =O’Connell, John=, 302 West End Avenue, New York City.

  =O’Connell, John F.=, 306 Broadway, Providence, R. I.

  =O’Connell, Hon. Joseph F.=, lawyer, 53 State Street, Boston, Mass.; a
      member of Congress.

  =O’Connell, P. A.=, treasurer of the James A. Houston Co., Boston,
      Mass.

  =O’Connor, Edward=, 302 Broadway, New York City.

  =O’Connor, Hon. J. J.=, 414–416 Carroll Street, Elmira, N. Y. (Life
      member of the Society.)

  =O’Connor, J. L.=, Ogdensburg, N. Y.

  =O’Connor, M. P.=, Binghamton, N. Y. (Life member of the Society.)

  =O’Connor, Thomas=, 920 East 156th Street, New York City.

  =O’Doherty, Rev. James=, Haverhill, Mass. (Life member of the
      Society.)

  =O’Doherty, Hon. Matt.=, Louisville, Ky.; a judge of the Circuit
      Court.

  =O’Donovan, Jeremiah (Rossa)=, New York City.

  =O’Donnell, Rev. James H.=, rector, St. Mary’s Church, Norwalk, Conn.

  =O’Dwyer, Hon. E. F.=, 37 West 76th Street, New York City; chief
      justice of the City Court of New York.

  =O’Farrell, P. A.=, Waldorf-Astoria, New York City (Life member of the
      Society.)

  =O’Flaherty, James=, advertising, 22 North William Street, New York
      City.

  =O’Gorman, Hon. J. A.=, 318 West 108th Street, New York City; a
      justice of the New York Supreme Court.

  =O’Gorman, Thomas A.=, the O’Gorman Co., Providence, R. I.

  =O’Hagan, W. J.=, of W. J. O’Hagan & Son, colonial antiques,
      Charleston, S. C.

  =O’Herin, William=, Parsons, Labette County, Kan.; superintendent of
      machinery and equipment, Missouri, Kansas & Texas Railway. (Life
      member of the Society.)

  =O’Keefe, Edmund=, 174 Middle Street, New Bedford, Mass.

  =O’Keefe, J. A.= (M. D.), Broadway, Providence, R. I.,
      lieutenant-colonel, Second Regiment, B. R. I. M.

  =O’Keefe, John A.=, 25 Exchange Street, Lynn, Mass.; a native of
      Rockport, Mass.; was graduated from Harvard College, class of
      1880; member of the Phi Beta Kappa; taught school in Housatonic,
      Mass.; was elected submaster of the Lynn (Mass.) High School in
      1881 and headmaster of the same in 1885; became a member of the
      teaching staff of the English High School, Boston, Mass.; studied
      law; was admitted to the bar of Essex County, Mass., and has since
      practised law in Lynn. In 1897 he was the Democratic candidate for
      attorney-general of Massachusetts. Member of the Lynn Board of
      Associated Charities, member of the New England Association of
      Colleges and Preparatory Schools; of the Essex Institute, and of
      the executive board of the Civic League of Lynn. Among Mr.
      O’Keefe’s classmates at Harvard were: Hon. Theodore Roosevelt,
      president of the United States; Hon. William S. Andrews, justice
      of the New York Supreme Court; Robert Bacon, partner of J. P.
      Morgan; Harold N. Fowler, professor of Latin; Hon. Josiah Quincy,
      mayor of Boston, Mass.; Albert Bushnell Hart, historian and
      professor, and many other people of note.

  =O’Keefe, John G.=, care of H. L. Horton & Co., 66 Broadway, New York
      City.

  =O’Leary, Jeremiah=, 275 58th Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =O’Leary, P. J.=, 161 West 13th Street, New York City.

  =O’Loughlin, Patrick=, lawyer, 18 Tremont Street, Boston, Mass.

  =O’Meara, Maurice=, president of the Maurice O’Meara Co., paper
      manufacturers, 448 Pearl Street, New York City.

  =O’Neil, Frank S.=, lawyer, O’Neil Building, Binghamton, N. Y.

  =O’Neil, Hon. George F.=, Binghamton, N. Y. (Life? member of the
      Society); was born in Ireland, and came to America at a very early
      age with his parents. After learning the machinery trade in
      Binghamton, he went West and engaged in mining in California.
      Returning to Binghamton, he went into the grocery business and
      real estate business, bought a controlling interest in a
      Democratic paper, which naturally brought him into politics. Never
      having had any taste for public office, he was, however, named as
      a presidential elector in 1892 for Grover Cleveland. He was
      appointed a member of the state committee, and served as a
      commissioner for the World’s Fair at Chicago by appointment of
      Governor Flower of New York. Having confidence in the growth of
      Binghamton, he became interested in its progress and general
      development. He became a stockholder in the electric light plant,
      a director in the First National Bank, and a trustee of the
      Susquehanna Valley Savings Bank. He is a prominent member of the
      Chamber of Commerce, and attends to his large real estate
      investments, being at the present time the largest tax-payer in
      the city of Binghamton and county of Broome.

  =O’Neil, Hon. Joseph H.=, president of the Federal Trust Co., Boston,
      Mass.; formerly a member of Congress; was later U. S. treasurer at
      Boston.

  =O’Neil, Rev. John P.=, Peterborough, N. H.

  =O’Neill, Rev. Daniel H.=, 935 Main Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =O’Neill, Rev. D. P.=, Westchester, N. Y.

  =O’Neill, Eugene M.=, Pittsburg, Pa. (Life member of the Society.)

  =O’Neill, James L.=, 220 Franklin Street, Elizabeth, N. J.; connected
      with the Elizabeth post-office for many years past; he has been
      president of the Young Men’s Father Mathew T. A. Society, and
      treasurer of St. Patrick’s Alliance, Elizabeth. He was one of the
      prime movers in the projection and completion of a monument to the
      late Mayor Mack of Elizabeth.

  =O’Rourke, Hon. Jeremiah=, of J. O’Rourke & Sons, architects, 756
      Broad Street, Newark, N. J.; U. S. supervising architect under
      President Cleveland. (Life member of the Society.)

  =O’Sullivan, Humphrey=, treasurer of the O’Sullivan Rubber Co.,
      Lowell, Mass.

  =O’Sullivan, James=, president of the O’Sullivan Rubber Co., Lowell,
      Mass.

  =O’Sullivan, John=, with the H. B. Claflin Co., Church Street, New
      York City.

  =O’Sullivan, Sylvester J.=, 66 Liberty Street, New York City, manager
      of the New York office of the United States Fidelity and Guaranty
      Co., of Baltimore, Md.

  =Patterson, Rev. George J.=, V. G., the Cathedral rectory, Boston,
      Mass.

  =Phelan, Hon. James D.=, Phelan Building, San Francisco, Cal.;
      recently mayor of San Francisco.

  =Phelan, James J.=, 16 Exchange Place, New York City; treasurer of the
      King’s County Refrigerating Co.; director in the Stuyvesant
      Insurance Co.; director in the Cosmopolitan Fire Insurance Co.
      When Ferdinand de Lesseps contracted to build the Panama Canal,
      Mr. Phelan became treasurer and manager of the American
      Contracting and Dredging Co., in which he was associated with the
      late Eugene Kelly, George Bliss, H. B. Slaven and others. This
      company contracted for and built fifteen miles of the canal. In
      1891 Mr. Phelan was appointed treasurer of the department of docks
      of the City of New York, which office he held for five years.

  =Phelan, John J.=, lawyer, 7 Wall Street, New York City; graduate of
      Manhattan College and of the Columbia Law School; member of the
      Xavier Alumni Sodality, the N. Y. Catholic Club, and the Manhattan
      Alumni Society.

  =Phelan, Rev. J.=, Marcus, Ia.

  =Philbin, Eugene A.=, lawyer, 52–54 William St., New York City; a
      regent of the University of the State of New York.

  =Piggott, Michael=, 1634 Vermont Street, Quincy, Ill.; a veteran of
      the Civil War. He was made second lieutenant of Company F, Western
      Sharpshooters, in 1861, while at Camp Benton, St. Louis, Mo.; was
      promoted first lieutenant, and while at Fort Donaldson, in the
      spring of 1862, was made captain; lost a leg at Resaca, Ga., in
      May, 1864; was subsequently connected with the U. S. revenue
      service; messenger in the national House of Representatives,
      Washington, D. C.; was made postmaster of Quincy, Ill., during
      President Grant’s first term, and held the position for over
      sixteen years; was appointed special Indian agent by President
      Harrison, and in that, as in every position held, displayed
      eminent ability.

  =Pigott, William=, iron and steel, Alaska Building, Seattle, Wash.
      (Life member of the Society.)

  =Plunkett, Thomas=, 257 Sixth Street, East Liverpool, O.

  =Power, Rev. James W.=, 47 East 129th Street, New York City.

  =Powers, Patrick H.=, president of the Emerson Piano Co., 120 Boylston
      Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Prendergast, W. A.=, 20 Nassau Street, New York City.

  =Quinlan, Francis J.= (M. D., LL. D.), 33 West 38th Street, New York
      City; was for a number of years surgeon in the U. S. Indian
      service; recently president of the New York Celtic Medical
      Society; president of the County Medical Association of New York;
      member of the State Medical Association, of the American Medical
      Association, and of the Academy of Medicine. Besides holding these
      positions of honor and responsibility, he is visiting surgeon to
      St. Vincent’s Hospital, New York City, to the New York City
      Hospital, to the Foundling Hospital and St. Joseph’s Hospital,
      Yonkers, N. Y. He is professor of Laryngology and Rhinology in New
      York Polyclinic and Laryngologist and Otologist to St. John’s
      Hospital, Long Island City.

  =Quinn, John=, lawyer, 120 Broadway, New York City.

  =Quinn, W. Johnson=, manager of the Hotel Empire, New York City.

  =Ramsey, Clarence J.=, 132 West 12th Street, New York City; public
      appraiser.

  =Reardon, Edmund=, manufacturer, Cambridge, Mass.

  =Regan, John H.=, lawyer, 422 55th Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Regan, W. P.=, architect, Lawrence, Mass.

  =Richardson, Stephen J.=, 1785 Madison Avenue, New York City.

  =Roach, James F.=, 5822 Fifth Avenue, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Rogan, John H.=, lawyer, 145 Nassau Street, New York City.

  =Rohan, John D.=, 49 Wall Street, New York City.

  =Rooney, John Jerome=, of Rooney & Spence, customs and insurance
      brokers, forwarding agents, 66, 68 and 70 Beaver Street, New York
      City.

  =Roosevelt, Hon. Theodore=, president of the United States, White
      House, Washington, D. C.

  =Rorke, James=, 40 Barclay Street, New York City.

  =Ryan, Charles V.=, Springfield, Mass.

  =Ryan, Christopher S.=, Lexington, Mass.

  =Ryan, James T.=, Phenix Insurance Co., P. O. Box 1010, New York City.

  =Ryan, John J.=, 171 East 94th Street, New York City.

  =Ryan, Michael=, 377 Broadway, New York City.

  =Ryan, Michael J.=, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Ryan, Nicholas W.=, 1444 Boston Road, borough of the Bronx, New York
      City.

  =Ryan, Hon. Patrick J.=, mayor-elect of Elizabeth, N. J.; is of the
      firm P. J. & W. H. Ryan, real estate and fire insurance, 205 Broad
      Street, Elizabeth.

  =Ryan, Most Rev. Patrick J.= (D. D.), archbishop of Philadelphia, Pa.;
      the Cathedral, Philadelphia.

  =Ryan, Timothy M.= (M. D.), Torrington, Conn.

  =Ryan, Hon. William=, of Wm. Ryan & Co., grocers, Port Chester, N. Y.

  =Sanders, Col. C. C.=, Gainesville, Ga; president of the State Banking
      Co. of Gainesville; alternate commissioner to World’s Fair,
      Chicago, Ill., 1893; vice-president for Georgia, American Bankers’
      Association. Colonel Sanders is of Irish and English ancestry. On
      the maternal side he is descended from Thomas and Theodosia M.
      Smyth, who emigrated from Ireland in 1793, landing in Charleston,
      S. C. They settled in Jones County, Ga. Thomas died November 28,
      1799. On the paternal side Colonel Sanders is a descendant of Rev.
      Moses Sanders, who emigrated from England, with two brothers, John
      and David, and arrived in Petersburg, Va., 1765. They embraced the
      patriotic cause in the Revolution and were active in operations
      against the British. Colonel Sanders, the subject of this sketch,
      graduated from the Georgia Military Institute, in June, 1861;
      entered the Confederate service; was made lieutenant-colonel of
      the Twenty-fourth Regiment of Infantry, Georgia Volunteers,
      August, 1861; served under General Lee in the Peninsular campaign,
      in the seven days’ battles around Richmond, Va., and was among the
      bravest of the brave; commanded his regiment at Malvern Hill and
      at Marye’s Heights, Fredericksburg, where the Twenty-fourth was a
      part of the Confederate forces that received the valorous charges
      of Meagher’s Irish Brigade. He also commanded the regiment at the
      battles of Chancellorsville and Antietam, at which latter conflict
      he was placed in command of Wofford’s Brigade. While in this
      position he met a bayonet charge from the Federals by a counter
      bayonet charge, and in the desperate fighting that ensued,
      fifty-eight per cent of Sanders’ heroic force was swept away.
      Colonel Sanders also led the Twenty-fourth at Cedar Creek,
      Chickamauga, Knoxville, the Wilderness, Spottsylvania Court House,
      and Sailor’s Creek. On April 6, 1865, Ewell’s Corps, to which
      Colonel Sanders’ regiment was then attached, was captured, and
      Colonel Sanders was sent as a prisoner of war to Washington, D. C.
      Writing of Meagher’s Irish Brigade, Colonel Sanders says: “I was
      in command of the Twenty-fourth Georgia Regiment, with other
      troops, at the foot of Marye’s Heights, receiving the five heroic
      and gallant charges of the Irish Brigade, whose prodigies of valor
      have filled the country with admiration. I saw the devoted Irish
      charge up to our breastworks, to be mowed down by a line of
      Confederate fire that no soldiers could withstand. I saw the Irish
      battalions cut down like grain before the reaper, yet the
      survivors would magnificently close up their ranks only to have
      huge gaps again cut through them. When forced back they rallied
      and came bravely on again, only to be riddled with bullets and
      torn by artillery. Their fifth charge was made with greatly
      decimated ranks that slowly recoiled like the waves of a
      tempestuous sea. When twilight descended upon the scene, a
      spectacle was presented unequaled in warfare. At least three
      fourths of my command was composed of men of Irish descent and
      knew that the gallant dead in our front were our kindred of the
      land beyond the sea. When, one by one, the stars came out that
      night, many tears were shed by Southern Confederate eyes for the
      heroic Federal Irish dead.” During the war Colonel Sanders was
      offered the rank of brigadier-general but declined the same.

  =Sasseen, Robert A.=, 50 Pine Street, New York City; insurance
      investments. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Scott, Cornelius J.=, manufacturer of awnings, decorations, etc., 439
      West 57th Street, New York City.

  =Scott, Joseph=, lawyer, Bradbury Building, Los Angeles, Cal.

  =Shahan, Very Rev. Thomas J.= (S. T. D., J. U. L.), professor of
      church history, Catholic University, Washington, D. C.; S. T. D.,
      Propaganda, Rome, 1882; J. U. L., Roman Seminary, 1889.

  =Shanahan, Very Rev. Edmund T.= (Ph. D., S. T. D., J. C. L.),
      professor of dogmatic theology, Catholic University, Washington,
      D. C.; A. B., Boston College, 1888; S. T. D., Propaganda, Rome,
      1893; J. C. L., Roman Seminary, Rome, 1895; Ph. D., Roman Academy,
      1895. Instructor in philosophy and dogmatic theology, American
      College, Rome, 1894–’95; lecturer in philosophy, University of
      Pennsylvania, 1898–’99; associate professor of philosophy, the
      Catholic University of America, 1895–1901.

  =Shanley, John F.=, 17 Washington Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Shanley, Thomas J.=, 344 West 87th Street, New York City.

  =Shea, Daniel W.= (Ph. D.), professor of physics, Catholic University,
      Washington, D. C.; A. B., Harvard University, 1886; A. M., Harvard
      University, 1888; Ph. D., Berlin, 1892. Assistant in physics,
      Harvard University, 1889 and 1892; assistant professor of physics
      in the University of Illinois, 1892–’93; professor of physics in
      the University of Illinois, 1893–’95.

  =Sheedy, Bryan DeF.= (M. D.), 162 West 73d Street, New York City.

  =Sheran, Hugh F.=, 46 Woodbine Street, Roxbury (Boston), Mass.

  =Sherman, P. Tecumseh=, of the law firm Taft & Sherman, 15 William
      Street, New York City; member of the Union League Club and of the
      Military Order of the Loyal Legion; son of the late Gen. William
      T. Sherman.

  =Shuman A.=, merchant clothier, 440 Washington Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Slattery, John J.=, president Todd-Donigan Iron Co., Louisville, Ky.

  =Sloane, Charles W.=, lawyer, 54 William Street, New York City.

  =Smith, Hon. Andrew C.= (M. D.), Dekum Building, Portland, Oregon;
      president of the State Board of Health; president of the Hibernia
      Savings Bank; member of the state Senate from 1900 to 1904; has
      served on the staff of St. Vincent’s Hospital for many years; has
      been president of the State and City Medical societies;
      represented Oregon for two years in the House of Delegates of the
      American Medical Association.

  =Smith, James=, 26 Broadway, New York City.

  =Smith, Rev. James J.=, 88 Central Street, Norwich, Conn.

  =Smith, Joseph=, Lowell, Mass.

  =Smith, Thomas F.=, clerk of the city court, 32 Chambers Street, New
      York City.

  =Smyth, Rev. Hugh P.=, rector of St. John’s Church, Lawrence Avenue,
      Roxbury (Boston), Mass.

  =Smyth, Rev. Thomas=, Springfield, Mass.

  =Smyth, Rev. Thomas M.=, East Liverpool, O.

  =Somers, P. E.=, manufacturer of tacks and nails, Worcester, Mass.
      (Life member of the Society.)

  =Spellacy, Thomas J.=, lawyer, 26 State Street, Hartford, Conn.

  =Spillane, J. B.=, managing editor _Music Trade Review_, Metropolitan
      Life Building, 1 Madison Avenue, New York City.

  =Storen, William J.=, 232 Calhoun Street, Charleston, S. C.

  =Sullivan, James E.= (M. D.), Providence, R. I.; was graduated from
      Bellevue Hospital Medical College, New York, 1879; also studied
      medicine in Dublin, London and Paris; was city physician of Fall
      River, Mass., for seven years; married, in 1885, Alice, daughter
      of the late Joseph Banigan of Providence; retired from practice in
      1891; member of the Rhode Island, Massachusetts and Providence
      Medical societies; vice-president of the University Club,
      Providence; a director of the Rhode Island Hospital Trust Co.;
      president and treasurer of the Sullivan Investment Co.,
      Providence.

  =Sullivan, John J.=, lawyer, 203 Broadway, New York City.

  =Sullivan, Hon. M. B.= (M. D.), Dover, N. H., formerly a state
      senator.

  =Sullivan, M. F.= (M. D.), Oak Street, Lawrence, Mass.

  =Sullivan, Michael H.=, lawyer, 34 School St., Boston, Mass.

  =Sullivan, Michael X.= (Ph. D.), instructor, Brown University,
      Providence, R. I.

  =Sullivan, Roger G.=, cigar manufacturer, 803 Elm Street, Manchester,
      N. H.

  =Sullivan, T. P.= (M. D.), 318 South Main Street, Fall River, Mass.

  =Sullivan, Timothy P.=, Concord, N. H.; furnished granite from his New
      Hampshire quarries for the new national Library Building,
      Washington, D. C.

  =Sullivan, William B.=, lawyer, Tremont Building, Boston, Mass.

  =Supple, Rev. James N.=, rector of St. Francis de Sales Church,
      Charlestown (Boston), Mass.

  =Sweeney, John F.=, the Sweeney Co., 256 Main Street, Buffalo, N. Y.
      (Life member of the Society.)

  =Sweeney, Rev. Timothy P.=, Fall River, Mass.

  =Sweeny, William Montgomery=, 120 Franklin Street, Astoria, L. I., N.
      Y.

  =Swords, Joseph F.=, Sulphur, Oklahoma. He is a descendant of Cornet
      George Swords, one of the A. D. 1649 officers in the service of
      kings Charles I and Charles II in Ireland. Joseph F. Swords is a
      member of the Sons of the American Revolution. He is of the fourth
      American generation from Francis Dawson Swords, graduate of
      Trinity College, Dublin, 1750, who was exiled from Ireland, 1760,
      and who served in the Patriot Army throughout the War of the
      Revolution.

  =Tack, Theodore E.=, 52 Broadway, New York City.

  =Taggart, Hon. Thomas=, Indianapolis, Ind.; proprietor of the Grand
      Hotel there; was elected auditor of Marion County, 1886;
      re-elected, 1890; has been mayor of Indianapolis; chairman of the
      Democratic state committee, 1892 and 1894; district chairman of
      the Seventh Congressional District; member from Indiana of the
      Democratic national committee. Is a native of Ireland.

  =Teeling, Rt. Rev. Arthur J.= (D. D.), rector of St. Mary’s Church,
      Lynn, Mass.

  =Thompson, Frank=, 257 West 129th Street, New York City.

  =Thompson, James=, of James Thompson & Bro., Louisville, Ky.

  =Tierney, Dennis H.=, real estate and insurance, Tierney’s Block, Bank
      Street, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Tierney, Edward M.=, Hotel Marlborough, Broadway, New York City.

  =Tierney, Henry S.=, 59 Prescott St., Torrington, Conn.

  =Tierney, Myles=, 317 Riverside Drive, New York City. (Life member of
      the Society.) President, Hudson Trust Co., Hoboken, N. J.

  =Toale, Patrick P.=, Toale P. O., Aiken County, S. C.

  =Travers, Vincent P.=, of the Travers Brothers Co., 41 Worth Street,
      New York City.

  =Tully, Hon. William J.=, Corning, N. Y.; a state senator.

  =Twohy, George J.=, trust officer, the Citizens’ Bank of Norfolk, Va.

  =Vincent, John=, lawyer, 45 Cedar Street, New York City; was first
      assistant district attorney under the late Hon. John McKeon for
      two years, and on his death was appointed by the court as his
      successor _ad interim_.

  =Vredenburgh, Watson, Jr.=, civil engineer, 50 Broadway, New York
      City.

  =Waldron, E. M.=, of E. M. Waldron & Co., building contractors, 84
      South Sixth Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Walker, William O’Brien=, 90 Wall Street, New York City, a descendant
      of the Revolutionary O’Briens of Machias, Me.

  =Waller, Hon. Thomas M.=, New London, Conn.; lawyer; member of the
      Connecticut Legislature, 1867, 1868, 1872, 1876 (speaker, 1876);
      secretary of state of Connecticut, 1870; mayor of New London,
      1873; state’s attorney, 1876–’83; governor of Connecticut,
      1882–’84; United States consul-general to London, England,
      1885–’89; commissioner to World’s Columbian Exposition.

  =Walsh, Frank=, secretary and credit manager, Wilkinson, Gaddis & Co.,
      wholesale grocers, 866–868 Broad Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Walsh, P. J.=, 503 Fifth Avenue, New York City.

  =Walsh, Philip C.=, 260 Washington Street, Newark, N. J.; of Walsh’s
      Sons & Co., dealers in irons and metals.

  =Walsh, Philip C.=, Jr., 260 Washington Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Walsh, Wm. P.=, 247 Water Street, Augusta, Me.

  =Ward, Edward=, of Ward Bros., contractors, Kennebunk, Me.

  =Ward, John T.=, Kennebunk, Me.

  =Ward, Michael J.=, 17 Shailer St., Brookline, Mass.

  =Whalen, Hon. John S.=, secretary of state, Albany, N. Y.

  =Wilhere, Hon. M. F.=, 31st and Master streets, Philadelphia, Pa.

  =Wright, Henry=, enameled wall tile, vitrified and glazed ceramics,
      aseptic floors, encaustic and embossed tiles, 584 East 148th
      Street, New York City.

  =Zabriskie, George A.=, 123 Produce Exchange, New York City.

  NOTE.—The publication of the present volume has been unavoidably
  delayed. This circumstance, however, has permitted the addition to the
  Roll of the names of members admitted early in 1908.

[Illustration:

  WALTER H. CREAMER.
  Lynn, Mass.
]

[Illustration:

  CAPT. JAMES W. McCARRICK.
  Norfolk, Va.
]

[Illustration:

  DANIEL W. SHEA, PH. D.
  Washington, D. C.
]

[Illustration:

  JOHN LAVELLE.
  Cleveland, Ohio.
]

[Illustration:

  CONGRESSMAN JOSEPH F. O’CONNELL.
  Boston, Mass.
]

                      SOME MEMBERS OF THE SOCIETY.




                   PRESIDENTS-GENERAL OF THE SOCIETY.


 =1897.= =Rear-Admiral Richard W. Meade, U. S. N. (retired), Philadelphia,
         Pa. Died May 4, 1897.=

 1897. Hon. Edward A. Moseley, secretary of the Interstate Commerce
         Commission, Washington, D. C.; was elected president-general on
         death of Admiral Meade.

 1898. Hon. Edward A. Moseley, Washington, D. C.

 1899. Hon. Thomas J. Gargan, Boston, Mass.; a prominent lawyer of that
         city; ex-member of the Police Commission; member of the Boston
         Transit Commission.

 1900. Hon. Thomas J. Gargan, Boston, Mass.

 1901. Hon. John D. Crimmins, New York City; prominent capitalist;
         official in banks, trust companies and other corporations.

 1902. Hon. John D. Crimmins, New York City.

 1903. Hon. William McAdoo, New York City; assistant secretary of the U.
         S. Navy under President Cleveland; prominent lawyer; ex-member
         of Congress; police commissioner of the City of New York.

 1904. Hon. William McAdoo, New York City.

 1905. Hon. John D. Crimmins, New York City.

 1906. Rear-Admiral John McGowan, U. S. N. (retired), Washington, D. C.

 1907. Rear-Admiral John McGowan, U. S. N. (retired), Washington, D. C.

  NOTE.—In Volume VI of the JOURNAL, and in one or two of the preceding
  volumes, the name of the first President-General of the Society, owing
  to an oversight in proof-reading, appears as George W. Meade. It
  should be Richard W., as above given.




  GENERAL INFORMATION REGARDING THE AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.


The Society was organized on January 20, 1897, in Boston, Mass., and now
has members in many states, the District of Columbia, one territory and
two foreign countries.

Briefly stated, the object of the organization is to make better known
the Irish chapter in American history.

There are two classes of members in the organization,—Life and Annual.
The life membership fee is $50 (paid once). The fee for annual members
is $5, paid yearly. In the case of new annual members, the initiation
fee, $5, also pays the membership dues for the first year.

The board of government comprises a president-general, a
vice-president-general, a secretary-general, a treasurer-general, a
librarian and archivist, and an executive council. There are also state
vice-presidents.

The Society has already issued several bound volumes and a number of
other publications. These have been distributed to the members and to
public libraries; also to historical organizations and to universities.
Each member of the Society is entitled, free of charge, to a copy of
every publication issued from the time of his admittance. These
publications are of great interest and value, and are more than an
equivalent for the membership fee.

The Society draws no lines of creed or politics. Being an American
organization in spirit and principle, it welcomes to its ranks Americans
of whatever race descent, and of whatever creed, who take an interest in
the objects for which the Society is organized. Membership application
blanks will be furnished on request.

The membership includes many people of prominence, and has been
addressed by many distinguished men. It occupies a position in the front
rank of American historical organizations.




                       VOLUME VI OF THE JOURNAL.


A copy of Volume VI of the JOURNAL of the Society was presented each of
the following libraries:


                           PUBLIC LIBRARIES.

 Arlington, Mass.
 Augusta, Me.
 Baltimore, Md.
 Bangor, Me.
 Binghamton, N. Y.
 Boston, Mass.
 Bridgeport, Conn.
 Brookline, Mass.
 Brooklyn, N. Y.
 Buffalo, N. Y.
 Cambridge, Mass.
 Chelsea, Mass.
 Chicago, Ill.
 Cincinnati, O.
 Cleveland, O.
 Columbus, O.
 Concord, N. H.
 Dedham, Mass.
 Denver, Col.
 Detroit, Mich.
 Dover, N. H.
 Elizabeth, N. J.
 Elmira, N. Y.
 Fall River, Mass.
 Fitchburg, Mass.
 Hartford, Conn.
 Haverhill, Mass.
 Holyoke, Mass.
 Indianapolis, Ind.
 Jamestown, N. Y.
 Lawrence, Mass.
 Leavenworth, Kan.
 Los Angeles, Cal.
 Lowell, Mass.
 Lynn, Mass.
 Malden, Mass.
 Manchester, N. H.
 Medford, Mass.
 Milwaukee, Wis.
 Minneapolis, Minn.
 Nahant, Mass.
 Nashua, N. H.
 New Bedford, Mass.
 Newburgh, N. Y.
 Newburyport, Mass.
 New Haven, Conn.
 New London, Conn.
 Newton, Mass.
 New Orleans, La.
 New York, N. Y.
 Norwich, Conn.
 Northampton, Mass.
 Oswego, N. Y.
 Peabody, Mass.
 Peace Dale, R. I.
 Peoria, Ill.
 Peterborough, N. H.
 Philadelphia, Pa.
 Pittsfield, Mass.
 Plymouth, Mass.
 Portland, Me.
 Portsmouth, N. H.
 Providence, R. I.
 Quincy, Mass.
 Rochester, N. Y.
 Sacramento, Cal.
 Salem, Mass.
 Saratoga, N. Y.
 Somerville, Mass.
 Springfield, Mass.
 Stamford, Conn.
 St. Louis, Mo.
 St. Paul, Minn.
 Syracuse, N. Y.
 Taunton, Mass.
 Toledo, O.
 Troy, N. Y.
 Utica, N. Y.
 Waltham, Mass.
 Watertown, Mass.
 Woonsocket, R. I.
 Worcester, Mass.
 Yonkers, N. Y.

  NOTE.—Many of the libraries here mentioned have also copies of
  preceding volumes and other publications of the Society.


                   COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES.

 Annapolis, U. S. Naval Academy.
 Boston University.
 Bowdoin.
 Brown.
 Clark, Worcester, Mass.
 Catholic University of America, Washington, D. C.
 Cincinnati.
 College of the City of New York.
 Columbia.
 Cornell.
 Dartmouth.
 Georgetown, Washington, D. C.
 George Washington University.
 Harvard.
 Johns Hopkins.
 Leland Stanford, Jr.
 New York University.
 Princeton.
 Seton Hall.
 Simmons College, Boston, Mass.
 Trinity College, Washington, D. C.
 Tufts.
 University of California.
 University of Chicago.
 University of Georgia.
 University of Michigan.
 University of Nebraska.
 University of Pennsylvania.
 University of Washington, Seattle.
 University of Texas.
 University of Vermont.
 University of Virginia.
 Washington, St. Louis, Mo.
 West Point.
 Yale.


                            OTHER LIBRARIES.

 American Antiquarian Society.
 Boston Athenaeum.
 Cambridge (Mass.) Historical Society.
 Catholic Club, New York City.
 Connecticut Historical Society.
 Cooper Union, New York City.
 Essex Institute, Salem, Mass.
 Kansas State Historical Society.
 Library of Congress.
 New York Historical Society.
 Maryland Historical Society.
 Massachusetts Historical Society.
 Minnesota Historical Society.
 Newberry Library, Chicago.
 New England Historic Genealogical Society.
 New Hampshire State Library.
 Newport (R. I.) Historical Society.
 New York State Library.
 Redwood Library, Newport, R. I.
 Rhode Island Historical Society.
 Wisconsin Historical Society.




                         PRAISE FOR VOLUME VI.


Among the letters received by Secretary Murray in praise of Vol. VI were
the following:

  From Dr. George McAleer, Worcester, Mass.:

                                        WORCESTER, MASS., April 6, 1907.

  DEAR MR. MURRAY: I have just received Volume VI of the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society. Its pages are filled with much
  important matter along the line in which the Society is specially
  interested, and it easily outranks any of its predecessors.
  Congratulating you upon your contribution thereto and the Society upon
  its production, I am,

                                   Yours very sincerely,
                                                           GEO. MCALEER.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  From the Librarian of Trinity College, Washington, D. C.:

                                                      TRINITY COLLEGE,
                                      WASHINGTON, D. C., April 15, 1907.

  THOMAS HAMILTON MURRAY, ESQ.,
    _Secretary of the American-Irish Historical Society_.

  DEAR SIR: The sixth volume of the records of your Society was received
  last week, and it is my pleasant duty to thank you for your courtesy
  in sending it to our library. The whole volume is extremely
  interesting, and the articles of such equal value that it is hard to
  put one before another. Two classes in history are just engaged on the
  periods covered by your learned writers.

                        Very sincerely yours,
                                SISTER MARY PATRICIA, S. N. D.,
                                                    _College Librarian_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                               From the President of Seton Hall College:

                                                 SETON HALL COLLEGE,
                                     SOUTH ORANGE, N. J., June 12, 1907.

  THOS. H. MURRAY, _Secretary_.

  DEAR SIR: I acknowledge with great pleasure the receipt of the Journal
  of the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume VI, 1906. I have
  perused it with great satisfaction and am happy and proud to know that
  the glorious part which the Irish bore in our early history, and are
  bearing today, is being so well brought before the eyes of the world.

  “To make better known the Irish Chapter in American History,” your
  neat and wholesome volume will undoubtedly contribute much, for the
  spirit manifested throughout the book is such as to beget love of the
  race and an interest to continue reading. And you build up the
  glorious edifice of true American-Irish history by simply claiming
  your due and disparaging no man. This intention, your illustrious
  President-General McGowan, in his address to the members of the
  Society, has chivalrously expressed in these memorable words: “We rob
  no race to gild the Irish name when we undertake to unearth the
  records of the past.... We merely wish to claim, assert and set forth
  the credit which to us belongs, for the part that men and women of
  Irish blood took in bringing about the reign of liberty and freedom we
  now enjoy.... We do not wish to praise ourselves by ‘masquerading in
  borrowed plumes,’ nor have we any desire to detract one iota from the
  credit that is honestly that of others.”

  Wishing you and your Society continued success and influence, and
  thanking you once again for your kindness, believe me,

                        Most sincerely yours,
                                    (VERY REV.) JAMES F. MOONEY,
                                        _President, Seton Hall College_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                   From Hon. P. T. Barry, Chicago, Ill.:

                                     87–97 SOUTH JEFFERSON STREET,
                                                 CHICAGO, April 8, 1907.

  THOMAS HAMILTON MURRAY,
    _Secretary-General, American-Irish Historical Society, Boston,
       Mass._

  DEAR SIR: Many thanks for the copy of the sixth volume of the Journal
  of the American-Irish Historical Society, to hand. This handsome
  companion to the other five already issued of the Society’s good work
  in restoring and compiling important facts pertaining to men of Irish
  birth and lineage in this country, makes interesting as well as
  instructive reading, indeed. I congratulate you upon the good work,
  and with best wishes I am,

                                        Very truly yours,
                                                            P. T. BARRY.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  From the President of the Boston Charitable Irish Society (founded
     1737).

                                               CHARITABLE IRISH SOCIETY,
                                               BOSTON, May 24, 1907.

  DEAR MR. MURRAY: Let me add a line of praise to the many you will
  probably receive for your work on the sixth volume of the Journal of
  the American-Irish Historical Society that reached me recently. Its
  contents are both interesting and instructive; such information as it
  contains becomes more valuable from day to day and I trust the good
  work will be continued. With grateful appreciation I am,

                            Sincerely yours,
                                                JOHN J. KEENAN,
                                                            _President_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  From the University of Nebraska:

                              THE UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA LIBRARY,
                                          LINCOLN, NEB., April 13, 1907.

  THOMAS HAMILTON MURRAY,
    _Secretary-General, American-Irish Historical Society, Boston,
       Mass._

  DEAR SIR: Please accept our thanks for Volume VI of the Journal of the
  Society, which you have been kind enough to present to the University
  Library. It is full of interesting and valuable matter, and will be
  highly appreciated by our department of American history.

  Of the previous volumes, I find that we have only Volume IV, and am
  writing to ask if it would be possible for you to furnish us with
  Volumes I to III and V, in order that our file of your valuable
  Journal may be complete?

  If you can arrange to supply these I shall be most grateful, both on
  behalf of the library and of the department of American history.

                            Very truly yours,
                                                WALTER K. JEWETT,
                                                            _Librarian_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  From M. J. Jordan, Esq., Counsellor-at-Law, Boston, Mass.:

                          42 COURT STREET, BOSTON, MASS., April 3, 1907.

  MY DEAR MR. MURRAY: I received this morning the Society’s Journal for
  1906. I find it like its predecessors, of great interest. Its
  admirable arrangement, valuable information, completeness of detail,
  is not a small or ordinary tribute to the skill and untiring
  earnestness of its compiler. I consider in the present, as well as the
  future, such a work invaluable.

                              Very sincerely yours,
                                                      MICHAEL J. JORDAN.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  From Patrick O’Loughlin, Esq., Counsellor-at-Law, Boston, Mass.:

                                           BOSTON, MASS., April 4, 1907.

  THOMAS HAMILTON MURRAY, ESQ.,
    _Secretary-General American-Irish Historical Society, Boston, Mass._

  MY DEAR MR. MURRAY: I have just received Volume VI of the Journal of
  the American-Irish Historical Society, and have perused its contents
  with a great deal of interest.

  No word of mine can convey the gratitude I personally feel for the
  disinterested and fruitful work of those, yourself among them, whose
  labors have succeeded in resurrecting so much information of value,
  tending to point out the importance of the work of the early Irish
  emigrants in the formative period of American history and
  institutions.

  I pray the good work may be continued, to the end that our children,
  as Americans, may learn the truths of history rather than its vagaries
  and falsehoods. With great respect, believe me,

                                      Sincerely yours,
                                                          P. O’LOUGHLIN.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  Appreciation briefly expressed:

  John J. Slattery, President of the Todd-Donigan Iron Company,
  Louisville, Ky.: “I beg to acknowledge receipt of the sixth volume of
  the Society’s publications, which, like the preceding volumes, is full
  of interesting and instructive matter.”

  From John Lavelle, Cleveland, O.: “I beg to acknowledge the receipt of
  the Society’s annual Journal, which I prize highly. A tithe of the
  information it contains is worth more than several annual dues. God
  bless our work.”

  From the Rev. T. J. Finn, Port Chester, N. Y.: “The sixth volume of
  the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society was received
  safely. You deserve the warmest congratulations on the interesting and
  instructive articles.”

  From Maurice O’Meara, New York City: “I am in receipt of Volume VI of
  the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society. I am very much
  pleased with it. It is very fine.”

  From James L. O’Neill, Elizabeth, N. J.: “I have received the sixth
  volume of our Society’s Journal. It is rich in historical matters
  beyond my expectations.”

  From Philip A. Curran, Waterbury, Conn.: “My Dear Friend: Please
  accept my sincere thanks for your kindness in sending me the new
  volume. It looks as interesting as its predecessors, and I hope to
  find time in the near future to read it through and through.”

  From P. F. Magrath, Binghamton, N. Y.: “Volume VI of the Journal is a
  credit to the Society. It is very rich in historical information of a
  most valuable kind, all neatly arranged and ably presented by the
  various writers.”

  From Capt. James Connolly, Coronado, Cal.: “The sixth volume of the
  Journal of the Society is a handsome book. The organization should be
  proud of it.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

  From the Plymouth Public Library, Plymouth, Mass.:

  MY DEAR SIR: I wish to thank you for the Journal of the American-Irish
  Historical Society kindly sent by the Society to the Plymouth Public
  Library.

                                Very truly yours,
                                                NELLIE THOMAS,
                                                            _Librarian_.

  April 24, 1907.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  From the New Orleans Public Library, New Orleans, La.:

                                                         April 17, 1907.

  DEAR SIR: The New Orleans Public Library has received from you a copy
  of the “Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society.” Please
  accept the thanks of the library for your kind donation.

                                Yours very truly,
                                                HENRY M. GILL,
                                                            _Librarian_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

    From Henry Stoddard Ruggles, Wakefield, Mass., April 5, 1907.

  THOMAS HAMILTON MURRAY, ESQ., _Secretary-General_:

  DEAR MR. MURRAY: I acknowledge with many thanks receipt, by your
  courtesy, of the latest volume of your Society’s Journal, filled with
  most valuable papers on many subjects, and exhibiting the same
  elegance of typography as its predecessors and the evidences of the
  careful proof-reading so essential in such works.

                                      Yours very truly,
                                                          H. S. RUGGLES.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  From Dennis H. Tierney, Waterbury, Conn.:

  MY DEAR FRIEND MURRAY: The Journal of the American-Irish Historical
  Society for 1906, being Volume VI, is at hand, and it is replete with
  interesting narrative and historical facts which are worthy of the
  Society.

                                      Fraternally yours,
                                                          D. H. TIERNEY.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  From the Library of Congress, City of Washington, April 4, 1907:

  SIR: In behalf of the joint committee of both houses of Congress on
  the library, I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Journal of
  the American-Irish Historical Society, Vol. 6, presented by the
  Society to the Library of Congress.

                            Very respectfully,
                                    Your obedient servant,
                                            HERBERT PUTNAM,
                                                _Librarian of Congress_.

  By H. H. B. MEYER,
      _Chief, Order Division_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  TO MR. THOMAS H. MURRAY, SECRETARY, SEAVIEW, MASS.

    From the Catholic University of America, Washington, D. C., May 18,
       1907.

  DEAR SIR: Permit me, in behalf of the rector and the faculties of the
  Catholic University of America, to acknowledge, with thanks, the
  receipt of a copy of the “Journal of the American-Irish Historical
  Society,” Vol. VI, which you have been so kind as to present to this
  library.

                                            Yours very truly,
                                                        WM. TURNER,
                                                            _Librarian_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  From Francis I. McCanna, counsellor-at-law, Providence, R. I.:

  MY DEAR MR. MURRAY: I wish to acknowledge, with thanks, receipt of
  Volume VI, Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society. This
  volume is very interesting and a commendable production in every
  respect. I want to congratulate you upon this fine result of your
  meritorious work.

                                     Very cordially yours,
                                                     FRANCIS I. MCCANNA.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  From the Riggs Memorial Library, Georgetown University:

  On behalf of the University I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your
  courteous gift: Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Vol.
  VI, for which I am directed to return cordial thanks.

                            Yours with much esteem,
                                            HENRY J. SHANDELLE, S. J.,
                                                            _Librarian_.

  Washington, D. C., April 6, 1907.




                             GENERAL INDEX.


 A bit of New York History, 76.

 A glance at some pioneer Irish in the South, 45.

 Annual meeting and dinner, 7.


 By way of introduction, 3.


 Emigration from New England to Ireland, 32.

 Executive Council of the Society, 5.


 Frontispiece.


 General information regarding the American-Irish Historical Society,
    162.


 Historical notes and papers, 15.


 Irish Ability in the United States, 17.

 Irish Influence in the Life of Baltimore, 69.


 Leading Events in the Career of the Society for 1907, 103.


 Membership Roll of the Society, 127.


 Necrology, 117.


 Officers of the Society, 5.

 Other Vice-Presidents, 6.


 Praise for Volume VI, 165.

 Presentations of Volume VI, 163.

 Presidents-General of the Society, 161.


 State Vice-Presidents, 6.


 The Battle of New Orleans, 97.

 The Irish in Appleton’s Encyclopedia of American Biography, 22.

 The Kelts of Colonial Boston, 80.


 Walsh’s Irish Regiment of Marine Artillery, French Army, 59.




                           ANALYTICAL INDEX.


 A Bit of New York History, paper by Thomas F. Meehan, in N. Y.
    _Catholic News_, 76.

 A Calendar of John Paul Jones’ Manuscripts in the Library of Congress,
    59.

 A Catholic was one of the Commissioners, 41.

 Ackland, Thomas, paper by, 80.

 Actors, list of, 31.

 Adventurous Irishman present “in all the early voyages of the English,”
    47.

 Affair at Fort William and Mary, paper, 35.

 “A fleete of nine sayl of ships” with 800 for the plantations of
    Virginia, 57.

 Agitators who have distinguished themselves included, 22.

 A glance at some of the Pioneer Irish in the South, paper by M. J.
    O’Brien, 45.

 “A hulke of Dublin,” 48.

 Aiken, Lambert & Co., 121.

 Alknomac, from Sligo, Ireland; cast away at Martha’s Vineyard, Mass.,
    38.

 Allen, Capt., commander of a company, 89.

 Allied with many of the old families, 38.

 Allison, Dr. Patrick, first pastor of Presbyterian Church, 73.

 Alsop farm, Newtown, L. I., purchased for a burial ground, 80.

 “A magnificent stone residence,” 37.

 American Catholic Historical Researches, 36.

 American College at Louvain, Belgium, 117.

 _American Ecclesiastical Review_, 118.

 American frigate Constitution, 85.

 American-Irish Historical Society, 88, 103, 111, 112, 113, 115, 162.

 Americans of Irish blood, to, 81.

 Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company, 84, 85, 89.

 An Early Dougherty Mentioned, 96.

 Anent the Shannon Family, paper, 101.

 Anglo-Saxon, the thing among some educators, 69.

 “An ideal soldier,” 42.

 “An Irish Man-of-War,” concerning, 95.

 Annual meeting of the Society, 1907, 104.

 Another Irishman who was not afraid to face the Indians, 46.

 Antwerp, 109.

 Appleton’s Encyclopedia tables, 31, 32.

 Appleton’s Encyclopedia of American Biography, classification in, 17.

 Appleton’s gives 65 names of Irish, 20, 21.

 Appleton’s list of actors, 31.

 Appleton’s list of Catholic clergy, 24, 25, 26.

 Appleton’s list of distinguished men, 29, 30.

 Appleton’s list of distinguished men in navy, 29.

 Appleton’s list of engineers, 30.

 Appleton’s list of inventors, 30.

 Appleton’s list of lawyers, 26, 27.

 Appleton’s list of musicians, 30.

 Appleton’s list of philanthropists, 30.

 Appleton’s list of physicians, 27.

 Appleton’s list of pioneers, 30.

 Appleton’s list of Protestant clergy, 26.

 Appleton’s list of soldiers, 23, 24.

 Appleton’s list of statesmen, 22, 23.

 Appleton’s list of those distinguished as educators, 29.

 Appleton’s list of those distinguished for art, 28, 29.

 Appleton’s list of those distinguished in literature, 27, 28.

 Appleton’s list of those distinguished in science, 29.

 A Providence, R. I. settler, 33.

 Archbishop Corrigan’s Catholic Cemeteries, 78.

 Archbishops Neale and Kenrick, 73.

 Ardea, Co. Kerry, Ireland, 92.

 Arthur, Chester A., “credited to the Irish race,” 20.

 Arthur, William H., president, 111.

 Artillery districts of Boston and Portland, 111.

 Art-men distinguished, list of, 28, 29.

 “A scene of unparalleled waste and ruin,” 1651, 32.

 A soldier of the Revolution, 96.

 Astor Library has Hakluyt’s famous work, 45.

 “Athwart the buttocks with my petronell,” 46.


 Bacon, Rt. Rev. David, D. D., bishop of Portland, 121.

 Baden-Baden, Germany, 117.

 Baker, Magistrate, 108.

 Baker, William F., president of civil service board, 108.

 Ballyhorick, County Cork, Ireland, 88.

 Baltimore and Maryland prominent during the Revolution, 71.

 Baltimore Gas Light Company, 72.

 Baltimore, Irish Influence in Life of, paper, 69.

 Baltimore, Md., 103, 108.

 Baltimore’s reputation for business honesty laid by, 70.

 Bannin, Michael E., New York, Indian commissioner, 110.

 Baptist Chapel, First, Baltimore, 73.

 Bar Association, Fitchburg, Mass., 107.

 Baratarian men, 98.

 Barbadoes Island, to which Cromwell exported Irish, 52, 53, 54, 56.

 Barber, Col. Francis, a soldier of the Revolution, paper by James L.
    O’Neill, 41.

 Barber, Col. Francis, killed, 1783, 43.

 Barber, Francis, commissioned by Congress major of Third N. J.
    Battalion, 42.

 Barber, Patrick, children of, 42.

 Barber, Patrick, of County Longford, Ireland, 41.

 Bard Bros, of Philadelphia, 121.

 Barrett, Robert, in expedition to Mexico, 47.

 Batchelder, Clark A., candidate, 107.

 Battle of Chippewa, 96.

 Battle of Fontenoy, 112.

 Battle of Lexington, 94.

 Battle of New Orleans, 97.

 Battle of New Orleans, detailed description of, 97, 98, 99, 100.

 Battle of New Orleans, forces engaged, 98.

 Battle of North Point, 74.

 Battle of the Boyne, 93.

 Battle of the Plains of Abraham, 86.

 Belcher, Jonathan, 1720, 101.

 Bellows Falls, Vt., 110.

 “Benburb Place,” 124.

 Berrian, Andrew, pen manufacturer, 121.

 Berry, John, apprenticed to Edward Keyly, 90.

 Bingham, Major, of Manila, 111.

 Blake, Col. John V. F., dies in New York City, 103, 104.

 Blodgett, Judge, chairman, R. I. commission, 108.

 Bodfish, Rev. Joshua P. L., rector, Canton, Mass., 103.

 Boer War, British army in, 103.

 Boies, Capt. James, promoter of papermaking, 86.

 _Bon Homme Richard_, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67.

 Book “suitable for a projected school in Virginia,” by John Brinley,
    58.

 Boston artillery district, 111.

 Boston Associated Board of Trade, 119.

 Boston Chamber of Commerce, 119.

 Boston city charter, new, 120.

 Boston evacuated by British, 86.

 Boston _Evening Transcript_, 96.

 “Boston Massacre,” 93.

 Boston, no Irish among early settlers of, 82.

 Boston’s first naval officer, 101.

 Boston’s first store on Washington St., opposite the Old State House,
    84.

 Boston’s great fire, 1760, 90.

 Boston’s oldest attorney, Charles A. Welch, 85.

 Boston’s Old Granary Burying Ground, 101.

 Boston the stronghold of the Catholic and Kelt, 83.

 Bourke, First Lieut., assistant surgeon, 111.

 Breen, Henry J., 108.

 Breen, Magistrate Matthew P., 108.

 Brigade under Gen. Clinton join the forces under Gen. Sullivan, 39.

 Brinsley, John, an English Puritan minister, 58.

 British army in the Boer War, 103.

 British defeated in battle of New Orleans, 99, 100.

 British evacuated Boston, 86.

 British formed along great drainage canal, 98.

 British government, 106, 107.

 British prisoners, memorial of, sent to the American commissioners, 65.

 British schooner, _Margaretta_, 116.

 British ship _Losely_, escaped prisoner from, 65.

 British strength about the same as Gen. Jackson’s, 98.

 British strength in battle of New Orleans, 98.

 Brooklyn Navy Yard, 104.

 Brown, Philip, appointed to command the prize _Mellish_, 63.

 Bruges, in Flanders, 36.

 Buffalo, N. Y., 104, 119.

 _Buffalo Sunday News_, and Nathaniel Shannon, 101.

 Bunker Hill Battle, 35.

 Burial place of Maj. Gen. John Sullivan, movement to restore, 115.

 Burton, Lieutenant, diary of, published, 94.

 Business men, list of, 29, 30.

 Butler, Captain of Raleigh’s largest ship, 47.

 Byrne, Thomas J., 108.


 Calhoun, first mayor of Baltimore, an Irish-American, 74.

 Calhoun, John C., “credited to the Irish race,” 20.

 Calvary Cemetery, New York City, 80.

 Cambridge (Mass.) Historical Society, 68, 75.

 Cambridge, Old, population practically all of New England origin, 75.

 Canadian frontier, so-called campaign on, 97.

 Canton, Mass., 103.

 Cape Cod, Mass., 106, 114.

 Captain Dominique You, a Baratarian, 98.

 Captain Stewart’s Irish brigade, 95.

 Captain Weaver’s artillery, detachment of, 95.

 Carberry, Brigid, widow of N. K. Connolly, 124.

 Carberry, Margaret, 124.

 Carberry, William, of Carrick-on-Suir, Ireland, 124.

 Carbray, Felix, children of, 124.

 Carbray, Felix, consul of Portugal, Port of Quebec, 124.

 Carbray, Felix, dean of Consular Corps, 125.

 Carbray, Hon. Felix, died, Quebec, 116.

 Carbray, Hon. Felix, M. R. I. A., obituary of, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125.

 Carbray, Niall, of Carrickcastle, 122.

 Carbray, Son & Co., Quebec, 123.

 Carey, James, town clerk of Charlestown, 90.

 Carmody, Gunner J. F., assigned to the _Tacoma_, 107.

 Carney Hospital, Boston, 108.

 Carney, Michael, co-partner, papermaking, Dorchester, 87.

 Carolinas and Virginia, a most diversified field for historical
    inquiry, 45.

 Carrell and Glaven, “two hardy Irishmen,” 48.

 Carrickcastle, near Dungannon, 122.

 Carrick-on-Suir, Ireland.

 Carroll, Charles, of Carrollton, 71, 72.

 Carroll, Charles, of Carrollton, credited to the Irish of
    pre-Constitution days, 19.

 Carroll, John, first archbishop, and Irish-American, 73.

 Carroll, Michael, his home destroyed, 90.

 Casey, John, of Muddy River, 88.

 Cassady, Michael, a patriot of Valley Forge, 94.

 Castle Garden, 120.

 Cathedral, Portland, Me., 121.

 “Catholic Address” to George Washington, 37.

 Catholic Burial Ground, letter regarding, 76, 77.

 Catholic cemeteries of New York, 78.

 Catholic churches, query as to rights of trustees, 76.

 Catholic clergy, list of, 24, 25, 26.

 Catholic Club, 120.

 Catholic priests, hundreds of, educated at St. Mary’s Seminary, 73.

 Celtic Irish origin, those of, not included, 22.

 Cemetery at Newtown Creek, 80.

 Chamillard, Capt. Paul de, 67.

 Chancellor Kent, trial before, 37.

 Chanler, Gov., 108.

 Charitable Irish Society, 88, 93.

 Charitable Irish Society oldest Irish Society in America, 94.

 Charlestown and Malden, corn mills in, 84.

 _Chattanooga_, U. S. cruiser, 113.

 Chidwick, Rev. Father, 108.

 Chowan County, near Edenton, N. C., 47.

 City of the Calverts, 75.

 Clancy, Boatswain J., detached from the _Franklin_ and ordered to the
    _Wasp_, 103.

 “Classifies race by the paternal side alone,” 18.

 Clinton, Gen. James, went up the Mohawk with brigade, 39.

 Clinton, Gov. Dewitt, portrait of, 109.

 Clinton, Gov. George, portrait of, 109.

 Clogher, County Tyrone, 122.

 Clonard, Le Chevr. de, 64.

 Coast Artillery, 112.

 Cochran, James, Irish boy captured by the Indians, 91.

 Coffee, in battle of New Orleans, 99.

 Cogan, John, one of the founders of Boston, 84.

 Cogan, John, “The Father of Boston Merchants,” 81, 82, 84, 85, 86, 88.

 Cohalan, Senator John P., 108.

 Cohasset, Mass., 112.

 College libraries receiving Volume VI, 164.

 College of Virginia, founded by King James, 1622, 57.

 Collins, Capt. Palfrey, came into port, 1768, 89.

 Collins, Christopher, a shoemaker in Dedham, 89.

 Collins, Clement, lodged his arms with selectmen, 89.

 Collins, Edward, resident of Cambridge, 89.

 Collins, Henry, made freeman, 1636–’37, 89.

 Collins, John, a “freeman” in 1646, 89.

 Collins, Joseph, nominated a watchman, 89.

 Collins, Mathew, in Capt. Allen’s Co., 1698, 89.

 Collins, Mayor, 120.

 Collins, Thomas, a farmer, 89.

 Collins, William, in Boston, 1636, 89.

 Colonial Boston, the Kelts of, paper, 80.

 Colonists landed in North Carolina, names of, 50.

 Colonists massacred by Indians, 1622, 57.

 Columbia Oil Company, 120.

 Columbus barracks, 106.

 Columbus, O., 106.

 Colvin Institute, founded by daughter of Patrick Colvin, 74.

 Colvin, Patrick, member of old Light Street Church, 74.

 Comba, Brig.-Gen. Richard, U. S. A., died, 104, 105.

 Commissioners for Ireland, 32.

 Commodore Rodgers extended hospitality to 79 Irish passengers, 39.

 Conaty, Rt. Rev. Thomas J., D. D., bishop, 122.

 Concerning “An Irish Man-of-War,” 95.

 Concerning the Irish Montgomerys, article, 43.

 _Connecticut_, battleship, 113, 114.

 Connolly, Catherine, of Clogher, Ireland, 122.

 Connolly, Nicholas K., 124.

 Conolly, William, a Boston Kelt, 94.

 Connor, Patrick, co-partner, papermaking, Dorchester, 87.

 _Constitution_, American frigate, 85.

 Continental Congress, 86, 91, 92, 93.

 Conyngham & Nesbitt, Philadelphia merchants, 64.

 Copenhagen, T. J. O’Brien, minister to, 110.

 Copland, Rev. Patrick, a famous clergyman of London, preaches in Bowe
    Street Church, 57.

 Copland, Rev. Patrick, first president of the College of Virginia, 57.

 Copley, John Singleton, son of Irish parents, 92, 93, 94.

 Cork and Halifax, 89.

 Corlet, Elijah, master of Cambridge Grammar School, 68.

 “Cornelius the Irishman,” 48.

 Cornwallis, surrender of, 71.

 Cottineau, Capt. Denis Nicolas, gave account, 61.

 Cottineau, Denis Nicolas, Captain of _Pallas_, 67.

 County Clare, Ireland, 92.

 County Galway, Ireland, 96.

 County Tyrone, Ireland, 122.

 Court of Assistants, Cogan juror of, 84.

 Craddock, Matthew, of London, 89.

 Cranston, R. I., 117.

 Crehore, Benjamin, maker of the first piano-forte in America, 85.

 Crehore, Teague, stolen from his parents in Ireland, 85.

 Crehore, Thomas, a chair maker, 85, 86.

 Crehore, Thomas, maker of the first playing cards in America, 85.

 Creoles, 98.

 Crimmins, Hon. John D., of N. Y. City, speaks of John M. O’Conor, 96.

 Crimmins, Hon. John D., sold collection, 105.

 Crimmins, Thomas E., 108.

 Croghan, Chief Boatswain J. S., to command _Wasp_, 103.

 Cromwellian adventurers in Ireland attracted and become efficient aids
    in the barbarous work of the English commissioners, 55.

 Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland, 32.

 Cromwell’s government, many Irish people sent to New England under, 83.

 Cromwell, wholesale exportation of the Irish by, 52.

 Cronan, Lieut. William Pigott, 113, 114.

 Cronan, Patrick J., 114.

 Cronin, Cornelius, Gunner, U. S. Navy, 103.

 Cullen alludes to Irish spinners and weavers, 88.

 Cullen, Bernard, author of “The Story of the Irish in Boston,” 90.

 Cullen’s Story of the Irish in Boston, 80.

 Culpepper, John, succeeds O’Sullivan as surveyor-general, 1671, 51.

 Cunneen, Hon. John, died at Buffalo, N. Y., 104.

 _Cyclopedia of Canadian Biography_, 123.


 Danish West Indies, 48.

 Danvers, Mass., 113.

 Dawson building, 118.

 Declaration of Independence, 93.

 Declaration of Independence, John Hancock first signer, 91.

 “Dementia Americana,” 69.

 Democratic party, 120.

 “Derman Mahoone fined 20 shillings for intertaining two Irishmen,” 90.

 Desmonds, immense estates of in Munster, 49.

 “Determining the relative values of great men,” 19.

 “Dingen a Cos,” whole company brought ashore at, 48, 49.

 Dingle, a well-merited tribute, inhabitants of, 48, 49.

 Diocese of Raphoe, 44.

 Dismal Swamp, 106.

 Distinguished descendants of the original Irish settlers, 19.

 Doherty estate, New York City, sale of, 104.

 Dominick Lynch and his family, paper, 36.

 Dongan charter, 109.

 Donovan, First Lieut. John G., Coast Artillery, 112.

 Dorchester Heights, fortifying, 86.

 Dorchester, Mass., early papermaking at, 87.

 Dougherty, Lieut. Charles, children of, 96.

 Dougherty, Lieut. Charles, removed from Brookfield to Framingham, 96.

 Dover, N. H., stronghold of Shannons, 101.

 Downpatrick, Co. Down, Ireland, 91.

 Duffy, Col. Edward, 108.

 Dugan, Maj. Thomas B., 12th U. S. Cavalry, 110.

 Duncan, Abner, on Gen. Jackson’s staff, 99.

 Dungannon, Co. Tyrone, Ireland, 93.

 Durham, N. H., 115.

 Dwyer, Capt. Charles G., paymaster, 110.


 Earl of Mount Alexander could ride at the head of a regiment all
    Montgomerys, 44.

 Educators, list of, 29.

 Eleventh St. burial ground, number of interments, 77.

 Eleventh St. graveyard epitaphs, 79, 80.

 Elizabethtown’s first settlers, 42.

 Ellison, J. Taylor, lieut.-gov. of Va., 109.

 Emigration from New England to Ireland, 32.

 Emmet, Thomas Addis, credited to the “immigrant class,” 19.

 Engineer Corps, West Point, 109.

 Engineers, list of, 30.

 England’s choicest troops killed and wounded, 97.

 England’s hypocritical methods, aware of, 71.

 England’s unjust tariff laws, driven from Ireland by, 70.

 English adventurers in Ireland engaged in man-hunting, 56.

 English and Puritan colony has become a great city, 83.

 Englishmen left in Virginia, employments of, 45.

 English soldiers, prosecution of, 93.

 Episcopal Church, first in New England, founded, 89.

 Epitaphs in Eleventh St. graveyard, 79, 80.

 Estaign, Comte de, 62.


 Fall River, Mass., 104.

 Fall River Roman Catholic diocese, 117.

 Fairbanks, Vice-Pres., addresses Irish Club, 105.

 Fairchild, Leroy W., 121.

 Fairservice, Andrew, 75.

 Faneuil Hall, Boston, 94.

 Farley, Archbishop, 124.

 _Favorite_ retaken and carried to the Bermudas, 64.

 Fernando, Simon, with Raleigh in first expedition, 48.

 Fifteenth U. S. Cavalry, 107.

 Fifth Avenue Cathedral, crypt of, holds remains of bishops, 78.

 Fifth Infantry in the Philippines, 105.

 “First-comers” meet Indians on Chowan River, 46.

 First Infantry, 106.

 First paper manufactured in America at Dorchester, 86.

 Fisher-folk of the Kerry coast, 49.

 Fitchburg, Mass., 107.

 Fitz-Maurice, Chevalier de, Letters to Capt. Paul Jones, 59, 60.

 Fitzpatrick, Brian, deserts to the Spaniards, 52.

 Fitzpatrick, Thomas B., presided, 104.

 Floating 220 boats on the Susquehanna, 39.

 Flynn, from County Galway, Ireland, 96.

 Foley, Capt. D. P., of revenue cutter service, 103.

 Fond du Lac, Episcopalian Bishop of, 85.

 Fontenoy, 112.

 Fort Adams, R. I., 111.

 Fort Carroll, 74.

 Fort Cumberland, 89.

 Fort Delaware, 108.

 Fort Hill, 84, 90.

 Fort Leavenworth, Kan., 106.

 Fort McHenry, Baltimore, Md., 74, 108.

 Fort of Red Men, 88.

 Fort Stanwix on the Mohawk River, 37.

 Fort William and Mary, affair at, paper by Rev. Thomas Gregory, 35.

 Fort William and Mary taken, 1774, 35.

 Fourteenth Infantry, 111.

 Fourth Voyage made to Virginia, 48.

 Foy, Julius L., a St. Louis member, dies, 103.

 _Franklin_ and _Wasp_, 103.

 Franklin, Benjamin, 67.

 Franklin, Benjamin, consents to commission of brevet lieutenant, 62.

 Friendly Sons of St. Patrick, 36, 120.

 Fulton, Robert, has no recognition in “double star” table, 19.

 Fulton, Robert, son of a Kilkenny man, 20.


 Gallagher, Bernard, Master, Letter to Capt. John Paul Jones, 63.

 Gallagher, Bernard, Midshipman, Letter to Capt. John Paul Jones, 63.

 Gallager, Thomas F., judge police court, 107.

 Gardner, Capt. Robert, a wealthy citizen, 94.

 Garrett, John, in expedition to Mexico, 47.

 Gates, General, takes Capt. William Kilton prisoner, 63.

 Gen. Brown’s staff, O’Conor on, 96.

 General Keene killed in battle of New Orleans, 100.

 General Wolfe, 86.

 Gen. Sullivan’s house open for inspection, 115.

 _Georgia_, battleship, 113, 114.

 Gettysburg, 104.

 Gibbons, Cardinal, 73.

 Glaven and Carrell, “two hardy Irishmen,” 48.

 Glendy, Rev. John, first pastor of Second Presbyterian Church, 73.

 Glen’s Falls, N. Y., 112.

 Gookin, Daniel, an Irish Quaker, engaged in transporting cattle from
    Ireland to Virginia, 56.

 Gookin, Daniel, Jr., became superintendent of Indian Affairs, 57.

 Gookin, Daniel, received grant of 2,500 acres in Upper Norfolk, 1637,
    57.

 Gookin, Daniel, “received patents for 300 people,” 56.

 Gookin’s Irish settlement, 57.

 Governor Bellingham, 88.

 Governor Dudley, 89.

 Governor Endicott marries John and Lysbell Morrell, 1659, both Irish,
    90.

 Governor Hancock, 86.

 Governor Hutchinson, 86.

 Governor’s Island, 106.

 Grafton, Right Reverend Charles C., 85.

 Greaton, Gen. John, 94.

 Greaton, Mr., keeper of Greyhound Tavern, 94.

 Great Swamp in Rhode Island, 88.

 Greenhalge, Governor, 119.

 Greenville, Sir Richard, and second voyage, 1585, 45.

 Greenville’s list of “first-comers,” 46.

 Gregory, Rev. Thomas, paper by, 35.

 Grey Abbey stock of the early Ulster settlement, 44.

 Greyhound Tavern, Roxbury, 94.

 Griffin, Martin I. J., paper by, 40.

 Griffis, Rev. William E., D. D., oration by, 115.

 Guild, Gov. Curtis, Jr., 107.

 Guillouet, Gen. Louis, Comte d’Orvilliers, “on the road,” 66.

 Gulliver, Anthony, a Milton resident in colonial days, 94.

 Gulliver, Capt. Lemuel, once lived at Algerine Corner, 95.

 Gulliver’s Travels, published, 1726, 95.

 Guy de Vernon’s _Science of War and Fortifications_, translated by
    O’Conor, 96.


 Haggerty, Ogden, of New York, 104.

 Hakluyt, Richard, on Raleigh’s first voyage of discovery, 1584, 45.

 Hakluyt’s Voyages, Navigations, etc., 45.

 Haley, James S., re-elected mayor, 105.

 Halifax and Cork, 89.

 Hall, William, constable, 1730, 94.

 Hamilton, Alexander, 42.

 Hancock, Anthony, 92.

 Hancock, John, emigrant from Down Co., Ireland, 91.

 Hancock, John, had Irish blood in veins, 91.

 Hancock, John, of Lurgan, and family of president, 91.

 Hancock, Neilson, founder of Irish Statistical Society, 92.

 Hancock, Thomas, one of the starters of the paper industry, 86.

 Harney, Gen. William Selby, field officer, 100.

 Harris, Charles N., appointed magistrate, 105.

 Harrison, Rev. Mr., unable to return to Ireland, 33.

 Harvard College, 90.

 Harvard College received gift of 70 acres from John Cogan, 85.

 Hatteras Indians at Croatoan, 50.

 Havana, 112.

 Hawk, a historian of North Carolina, 50.

 Hawkins, Sir John, in expedition to Mexico, 47.

 Hayes, Capt. Edward, in expedition to Newfoundland, 1583, 47.

 Healy, Bishop, 122.

 Healey, Rev. John, first Baptist minister in Baltimore, 73.

 Healey, William, in real estate transactions, 89, 90.

 Heath’s regiment, 94.

 Heitman’s _Officers of the American Revolution_, 101.

 Hendricken, Bishop, 117.

 Hennessey, Lieut. Peter J., 5th U. S. Cavalry, 111.

 Heroes of Montgomery’s Army, 44.

 Hewatt’s Historical Account of the Rise and Progress of the Colonies of
    South Carolina and Georgia, 50.

 Hibbens, Mrs., hung for witchcraft, 88.

 Hibbens, William, an early citizen of Boston, 88.

 Higgins, Governor, of R. I., 108, 115.

 Higgins, James H., inaugurated governor of R. I., 103, 115.

 Histories of Boston ignore the story of John Cogan, 81.

 Hoban, James, “architect and builder of the president’s palace,”
    Washington, 40.

 Holy Cross College, 121.

 Holy Family School, 118.

 Holy Name Society, 118.

 Hongkong, 119.

 Hotel Brunswick, Boston, annual meeting at, 104.

 Hotten, John Camden, in his famous work gives list of those leaving
    Barbadoes, 52.

 Howes, Osborne, died, Brookline, Mass., 106.

 Howes, Osborne, Japanese consul, Boston, 120.

 Howes, Osborne, obituary of, 118, 119, 120.

 Humphreys, Col., “at the foot hereof,” 62.


 “Immortalized in becoming wood-cuts,” 20.

 Incident of an expedition under Gen.
 John Sullivan, article, by G. F. Radway, 39.

 Indianapolis, Ind., 163.

 Indians and Spaniards capture Miles Philips’ whole company, 47.

 Indians, at summer overflow of river, fled in terror, 39.

 Indian chiefs framed bill of expense to England, 109.

 Indians of North Carolina, first to set eyes on the white men who came
    to America, 45.

 Inniskillen Foot, Twenty-seventh, 97.

 Inventors, list of, 30.

 Ireland, 108, 120, 125.

 Ireland, County Galway, 96.

 Ireland, County Limerick, 105, 112.

 Ireland, County Tyrone, 122.

 “Ireland has always been a hive from which America has derived sturdy
    hewers of wood to subdue the forests,” 57.

 Irish Ability in the United States, paper by James Jeffry Roche, LL.
    D., 17.

 Irish ability, Lodge’s tabulated misrepresentation of, 21.

 Irish ability, true figures of, 32.

 Irish account, stellar classification of, on the wrong side, 20.

 Irish allowed nine statesmen in first list, 22.

 “Irish” allowed only one double star, 20.

 Irish-Americans, 71.

 Irish blood, a great infusion of, received in Virginia and the
    Carolinas, 1678, 54.

 Irish blood, men of, not prominent, 83.

 Irish brigade, battle of Fontenoy, 112.

 Irish builders of the White House, paper by Martin I. J. Griffin, 40.

 Irish business men long influenced the financial interests of
    Baltimore, 72.

 Irish castaways among the Indians of the Danish West Indians, 48.

 Irish Catholic charity, 124.

 Irish “convicts” under the vassalage of colonial masters suffered great
    privations, 55.

 Irish families invariably large, 54.

 Irish Fellowship Club, Chicago, 105.

 Irish gloriously prominent, 31.

 Irish in Boston, the story of, 80.

 Irish Influence in the Life of Baltimore, paper, by D. J. Scully, 69.

 Irish in the forefront in Catholic affairs in Baltimore, 73.

 Irish laid no claim to be Anglo-Saxons, 69.

 Irishman’s readiness to assimilate with other nationalities, 75.

 Irishmen among first settlers of the western world, 49.

 Irishmen in the Massachusetts colony, 93.

 Irish merchants, names of, who contributed to buy cloth and make
    uniforms, 71.

 Irish merchants who came to Baltimore, 70.

 Irish Montgomerys, concerning the, 43.

 Irish names among lists of Englishmen, 46.

 Irish names appear among earliest records of Boston, 82.

 Irish names of priests and bishops in Baltimore given, 73.

 Irish National Association, 124.

 Irish of New England encouraged to return to Ireland, 33.

 Irish political refugees sometimes classed as “convicts,” 55.

 Irish Presbyterian Church in Boston, 91, 93, 94.

 Irish Presbyterians of Boston, manufacturers, 87.

 Irish Protestants, 88.

 Irish race misrepresented by writers, 17.

 Irish rebellion, 44.

 Irish regiment of Marine Artillery, Walsh’s, 59.

 “Irish Romanists” in North Carolina, 50.

 Irish sailors manned Raleigh’s ships, 49.

 Irish Scots and Scotch-Irish, 87.

 Irish seamen manned ships, “not a few” sailing from English ports, 46.

 Irish settlers, distinguished descendants from, 19.

 Irish spinners and weavers, 88.

 Irish Statistical Society, 92.

 Iron Duke, brother-in-law of Gen. Pakeman, 97.

 Isthmian canal, 119.

 Ithaca, N. Y., 115.


 Jackson, Andrew, has no recognition in “double star” table, 19.

 Jackson, Andrew, son of Andrew of Carrickfergus, 20.

 Jackson, Daniel, children of, 35.

 Jackson, Daniel, query respecting, 34.

 Jackson, General, 100.

 Jackson, General, of Irish parentage, 97.

 Jackson, Stephen, a Providence, R. I. settler, 33.

 Jackson, Stephen, genealogy of family, 34.

 Jack’s Reef, Onondaga Co., N. Y., 96. U. S. treasury, money deposited
    by will in, 96.

 Jamestown Exposition, 106, 108, 109.

 Japan, T. J. O’Brien, ambassador to, 110.

 Jay, Gov. John, portrait of, 109.

 Johnson, Pres. Andrew, 105.

 Jones, Capt. John Paul, certificate to Lieut. Edward Stack, 62.

 Jones, Capt. John Paul, letter to Capt. John Plaince, 65.

 Jones, Capt. John Paul, letter to “The Revd. Father John” Mehegan, 65,
    66.

 Jones, Capt. John Paul, letter to “The Revd. John Mayhagan,” 65.

 Jones, Capt. John Paul, officers of auxiliary vessels under command of,
    67.

 Jones, Capt. John Paul, orders to Lieut. Peter Amiel, 66.

 Journal of the Society, presentation of Vol. VI, 163.


 Kallahan, Capt. Charles, commands ship, _True Friendship_, sailing from
    Barbadoes, 54.

 Kansas City, Mo., 110.

 Keating’s Irish grenadiers, 95.

 Keenan, Hon. Patrick, N. Y. City chamberlain, died, 108, 109.

 Keleher, Maj. Timothy D., granted leave of absence, 110.

 Kelly, Edward A., died Cohasset, Mass., 112.

 Kelly, Michael, of New Hampton, N. H., 105.

 Kelts, names of in Colonial Boston, 82.

 Kennedy, John Pendleton, an Irish-American, 74.

 Kenrick, illustrious Archbishop, 73.

 Kentucky and Tennessee riflemen, 1500 of, 97, 98.

 Kenmare, Ireland, 120.

 Keyly, Edward, 90.

 Killeran, Captain, his home destroyed, 90.

 Kilton, Capt. William, taken prisoner by Gen. Gates, 63.

 King Frederick gave dinner, 110.

 King Philip’s War, 88.

 Kirle, Richard, “an Irish gentleman,” becomes governor, 1680, 52.

 Knox, Maj. Gen. Henry, a dashing soldier of the Revolution, 94.


 Lacey, Col. F. E., family of, 106.

 Lacey, Col. Francis E., died, N. Y. City, 105.

 Lafayette gives Barber a sword, 42.

 Lafayette helped by Purviance to clothe his half-starved and
    half-clothed army, 71.

 Lafayette, Marquis de, 62.

 Lane, Master Ralph, having charge of employments of the Englishmen in
    Virginia, 45.

 Langenbruchen, Baden-Baden, 117.

 Lawson, a historian of North Carolina, 50.

 Lawyers, distinguished, list of, 26, 27.

 Leading events in career of the Society, 1907, 103.

 Leary, Gen. Peter, Jr., wrote U. S. war department, 108.

 Lechford’s notebook, 84.

 Lenihan, Capt. Michael J., of general staff, 111.

 Letter of a Catholic resident of N. Y. City, 76.

 Letters to John Paul Jones, extracts from, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 67.

 Lewiston, Me., 115.

 Lexington, Eleanor, writes in the _Buffalo Sunday News_ of Nathaniel
    Shannon, 101.

 Light Street Church, now Mount Vernon, Baltimore, 74.

 Limerick County, Ireland, 104, 106.

 Linehan, Col. John C., author of “The Irish Scots and the
    Scotch-Irish,” 87, 90.

 Linsmore castle, built by Raleigh, 49.

 List of those continuing Stevenson’s work, 70.

 List of those leaving Island of Barbadoes for Virginia and the
    Carolinas, 53, 54.

 Literary men, list of, 27, 28.

 Lodge, Henry Cabot, and Century Magazine, 17.

 Lodge must plead guilty to one of two charges, 32.

 Lodge’s tables, 31, 32.

 London, L. W., statement of Montgomery ancestry, 43.

 Long wharf, the oldest in Boston, built by Cogan, 84.

 Looking back at Old Cambridge, Mass., 75.

 Lords Proprietors had agents employed in seeking emigrants in Ireland,
    etc., 50.

 Los Angeles, Cal., 122.

 Louvain, Belgium, 117.

 Luzon, Northern, Philippines, 105.

 Lynch and Stoughton, articles of co-partnership, 36.

 Lynch, Dominick, children of, 38.

 Lynch, Dominick 3d, a naval officer, 38.

 Lynch, Dominick, 4th Lieut, in U. S. Cavalry, 38.

 Lynn, Mass., 108.


 Macarthy, Eugene, Captain, certificate regarding “Commodore” Paul
    Jones, 62.

 Macarthy, Eugene, letter to John Paul Jones, 60.

 Macarthy, Eugene, Lieut., 60.

 Macarthy, Eugene, recommended for lieutenant, 59.

 MacNamarra, Chevalier de, Lieutenant, letter to Capt. John Paul Jones,
    64.

 Maghera, Ireland, 91.

 Mahoney, Lieut.-Col., assigned to the Philippine Islands, 104.

 Malden and Charlestown, corn mills in, 84.

 Maloney, Judge Thomas, died, Ogden, Utah, 105.

 Manchester, N. H., 121.

 Manila, Philippines, 111.

 Manley, John and others, Captains, “Uniform dress for the navy agreed
    to,” 64.

 Manoville, Le Chevalier de, letter to Capt. John Paul Jones, 67.

 Manuscripts of John Paul Jones, a calendar of, 59.

 Marcella Street Home, 89.

 _Margaretta_, British schooner, 116.

 “Margaret Noriss, an Irishwoman, is admitted to the town,” 90.

 Martin, John, a ship carpenter, 90.

 Massachusetts Bay commonwealth, 94.

 Massachusetts colonial records, 88.

 Massachusetts State Archives, 101.

 Mather, Cotton, in a sermon in 1700, 88.

 Mather, Increase, father-in-law of Nehemiah Walter, 68.

 Maxwell, Sarah, wife of Robert Montgomery, 43.

 McCarthy, Capt. William, ship-owner, 89.

 McCarthy, Florence, dealer in provisions, 89.

 McCarthy, Justice John Henry, 108.

 McCarthy, Maj. Daniel F., quartermaster, 111.

 McCarthy, Patrick J., inaugurated mayor of Providence, R. I., 103, 115.

 McCarthy, Thaddeus, of colonial Boston, 89.

 McCarthy, Thomas, chosen constable, 89.

 McClellan, Mayor, appoints magistrate, 105, 106, 108, 109.

 McClosky, Cardinal, parents of buried in St. Patrick’s Cemetery, 78.

 McClure, David, N. Y. City, died, 112.

 McDonald, Gen. William, first to run packets on Chesapeake Bay, 72.

 McDonnell, Peter, died on White Star steamer, _Oceanic_, 112.

 McDonnell, Peter, obituary of, 120.

 McDonough, Capt. Michael J., relieved, 109.

 McDonough, Capt. Michael J., U. S.

 Military Academy, 111.

 McGee, James, commander of vessel, 94.

 McGillicuddys, reunion of, 112.

 McGowan, Admiral, president-general of Society, 109.

 McGowan, Borough Pres. Patrick F., 108.

 McGowan, President, 106, 107.

 McHenry, James, first secretary of the navy from Maryland an Irishman,
    74.

 McKim, Isaac, founded first free school in Baltimore, 72.

 McLean, Hugh, promoter of papermaking, 86, 87.

 McLean, John, a slater, 94.

 McMahon, Capt. John, monument to erected by the Montgomery Guards, 79.

 McMahon, Mayor James H., presided, 107.

 McPartland, Stephen, bought Doherty estate, 104.

 Meehan, Thomas F., paper by from _Truth Teller_, 76.

 Mehegan, John, clergyman, letter to Capt. John Paul Jones, 64.

 Mehegan, John, ordered to obtain two hogsheads of porter, 65.

 Membership Roll, 126–160.

 Mexico, early expedition to, 47.

 Meylan, James, is to be sent proportions of 8 and 18 pounders, 66.

 Miller, Ann, wife of Samuel Shannon, 101.

 Milton Lower Mills, house and factory of Thomas Crehore at, 86.

 _Minnesota_, steamer from Seattle, 112, 113.

 Minute men, first company in America, 94.

 Montgomery, Alexander, member of Irish Parliament, 43.

 Montgomery, Allerian, 44.

 Montgomery, Gen. Richard, ancestry and family of, 43.

 Montgomery Guards erect monument, 79.

 Montgomery’s army, Heroes of, 44.

 Montgomerys of Ballyleek, 44.

 Montgomerys of Grey Abbey, County Down, 44.

 Montgomerys, six in the Irish Parliament, “all over six feet in height
    and the handsomest men in Dublin,” 44.

 Montgomery, Thomas, family connections of, 43.

 Montpelier, Vt., mayor re-elected, 105.

 Montreal, Canada, 121, 122.

 Moore, John and Joseph, 88.

 Moore, John, servant of the governor, 90.

 Morehead, Rev. John, pastor of Irish Presbyterian Church, 94.

 Moroney, William, perished in great storm, 94.

 Morrison, Hon. A. L., paper by, 97.

 Morton, Alexander, 121.

 Moseley, Edward A., 106.

 Mount Vernon Place Church, Baltimore, 74.

 Moylan, James, merchant, letter to John Paul Jones, 61, 64.

 Mulcahy, Mrs. M. A., letter of, 96.

 Munster, estates of the Desmonds in, 49.

 Munstermen largely composing second colony, 57.

 Murphy, Col. Paul St. C., assumed command of Marine Corps, Brooklyn
    Navy Yard, 104.

 Murphy, First Lieut. John C., 4th U. S. Infantry, retired, 110.

 Murray, Thomas Hamilton, secretary of American-Irish Historical
    Society, 88.

 Murray, Thomas H., papers by, 59.

 Museum of Fine Arts, 92.

 Musicians, list of, 30.

 Musketo’s Bay, St. John’s Island, 48.


 Names of Kelts in colonial Boston, 82.

 Names of natives of Ireland in Greenville’s lists, 46.

 Names of persons leaving the Island of Barbadoes for the American
    colonies, 53, 54.

 Names of prominent New York families buried in St. Patrick’s Cemetery,
    78.

 Names of some pastors and their assistants buried in St. Patrick’s
    Cemetery, 78.

 Napoleon won Waterloo, 100.

 Napoleon’s marshals in the Spanish Campaign, 99.

 Narragansett Hotel, Providence, R. I., 116.

 National Cemetery, Fort Leavenworth, 106.

 National House of Representatives, 116.

 Natives of Ireland in Greenville’s lists of “first-comers,” 46.

 Nautical Training School, 119.

 Naval men, list of, 29.

 Neale, Archbishop, 73.

 Necrology, 1907, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125.

 Neill’s History of the English Colonization of America, 57.

 Nesbitt, Jonathan, banker, letter to John Paul Jones, 61.

 New Bedford, Mass., 104, 118.

 Newbury, Mass., 112.

 Newce, Sir William, an English officer, offered the governor “to
    transport two thousand persons to Virginia,” 56.

 New England families arrive at Limerick, 1656, 33.

 New Hampshire State College, 115.

 New Hampton, N. H., 105.

 New London, Ct., 111.

 New Orleans, battle of, 97, 98, 99, 100.

 Newry, Hancocks long engaged in trade of, 91.

 _N. Y. Catholic News_, extract from, 76.

 New York City, 107, 108, 109, 111, 119, 121, 125.

 New York History, A Bit of, 76.

 New York Mortgage and Securities Company, 120.

 New York navy yard, 113.

 _New York Times_, 119.

 _New York Tribune_, 119.

 No Irish among the settlers of Boston in 1630, 82.

 Nolan, Capt. Dennis F., 30th U. S. Infantry, 115.

 North Carolina and early inhabitants, 50.

 Norton, Prof. Charles Eliot, extract from address by, 75.

 Nugent, Edward, “the bold Irishman,” 47.


 O’Brien, Jeremiah, erection of monument to, 116.

 O’Brien, Michael J., paper by, 45.

 O’Brien, Thomas J., U. S. minister to Copenhagen, 109, 110, 113.

 O’Callaghan, Rev. Eugene M., vicar general, 121.

 _Oceanic_, White Star steamer, 120.

 O’Connell, Archbishop, 103.

 O’Connell, Maurice, Captain, letter to Capt. John Paul Jones, 67.

 O’Connor, Lieut. M., assigned 15th U. S. Cavalry, 107.

 O’Connor, 2d Lieut. James, assigned to Havana, 112.

 O’Conor, Lieut. John Michael, U. S. A., 96.

 O’Donnell, Gen. Columbus, 72.

 O’Donnell, John, named Canton, 72.

 Officers of auxiliary vessels, list of, 67.

 O’Flaherty & McPartland, firm of, 104.

 Ogden, Utah, 105.

 O’Kelly, James Gerard, Lieutenant of Grenadiers, 61.

 O’Kelly, James Gerard, resigned from Walsh’s regiment, 61.

 O’Killia, David, Cape Cod, Mass., 106, 118.

 Old Cambridge, Mass., Looking back to, 75.

 Old Granary Burying Ground, Boston, 101.

 Old South Church, Boston, Shannon member of, 101.

 Oliver Hibernian Free School, 72.

 Oliver, John, founded the Oliver Hibernian Free School, 72.

 O’Loughlin, William J., 2d U. S. Infantry, 111.

 O’Neill, Henry, of Dungannon, 93.

 O’Neill, James L., paper by, 41.

 O’Neill, Sir Neal, 93.

 “One of my Irish boys” who shot Pemisapan, 46.

 O’Reilly’s, John Boyle, visit to Dismal Swamp, 106.

 “Original settlers all who came to this country before the date of the
    adoption of the Constitution, A. D., 1789,” 18.

 O’Seanchain, first form of surname Shannon, 101, 102.

 O’Sullivan arrested by the town marshal, 52.

 O’Sullivan, Florence, “a true son of Ireland,” 51.

 O’Sullivan, Florence, surveyor-general of the province, 51.

 O’Sullivan had charge of “the great gun,” 51.

 Otsego Lake, New York, 39.

 Over 10,000 should be credited to the “English race,” 18.

 Overton, Tom, on Gen. Jackson’s staff, 99.


 Pacific Mail Steamship Company, 119.

 Paine, Robert, 93.

 Paine, Robert Treat, signer of Declaration of Independence, 93.

 Pakenham, General, killed, 97, 98, 99, 100.

 Pamlico Sound, entered by “first-comers,” 46.

 Panama, 119.

 Parson Adam’s pulpit, powder buried under, 36.

 Patterson, Thomas, grandson of Allerian Montgomery, 44.

 Patterson, William, gave Patterson Park to Baltimore, 71.

 Pelham, Peter, engraver, painter, etc., 94.

 Pemberton, Mr., a teacher, 1767, 42.

 Pemisapan, king of the Indians, 46.

 “Pemisapan’s head in his hands,” 47.

 Philadelphia, Pa., 119, 121.

 Philanthropists, list of, 30.

 Philippines, 104, 105, 106, 111, 115.

 Philip’s company haled before the governor, who “visited them with the
    terrors of the Inquisition,” 47.

 Philip’s company sentenced, 47.

 Philip’s men executed in City of Mexico, 47.

 Philips, Miles, put ashore with 68 men a little north of Panuco, Golf
    of Mexico, 47.

 Physicians, list of, 27.

 Pioneer Irish in the South, paper, 45.

 Pioneers, list of, 30.

 Pioneers of the South not all of Anglo-Saxon origin, 55.

 Plymouth Club, 118.

 Polk, James K., descendant of Irish Polk or Pollock, 20.

 Portland artillery district, 111.

 Portland, Me., 121.

 Portsmouth, N. H., 101.

 Prendergast’s Cromwellian Settlement, 32.

 Prendergast relates how agents throughout Ireland “were authorized by
    Parliament to seize women, orphans and the destitute to be
    transported to Barbadoes and the plantations of Virginia,” 55, 56.

 Prerogative Court of Ireland, 43.

 Presbyterian Church, First, Baltimore, 73.

 Presbyterian Church, Second, Baltimore, 73.

 President-Generals of the Society, 161.

 Presidio, San Francisco, 104.

 Prince of Ulster, Shane the Proud, 93.

 Prize ships at Brest, 65.

 Protestant clergy, list of, 26.

 Protestant Kelts in Boston, 93.

 Protestants leave Ulster for plantations in North America, 91.

 Providence apostolate, 117.

 Providence Cathedral, 117.

 Providence, R. I., 115, 116, 117.

 Province of Arba, Northern Luzon, 105.

 Province of Quebec, 123.

 Provincial authorities anxious to attract emigrants, 55.

 Public libraries receiving Volume VI, 163, 164.

 Purviance, Samuel, chief man of the town, 71.


 Quebec, Canada, 122, 123, 124, 125.

 Quebec, Canada, tablet in, to Gen. Montgomery’s soldiers, 44.

 Quebec Harbor Commission, 125.

 Queen of France, “She Is a Sweet Girl,” 65.

 Quinn, Col. James B., U. S. Engineer Corps, retired, 110.


 “Race distribution in the main correct,” 18.

 Race extraction of 14,243 persons named as deserving mention, 18.

 Radway, G. Frank, article by, 39.

 Raleigh’s charter from the English crown, 49.

 Raleigh, Sir Walter, 48, 49.

 Raleigh, Sir Walter, the famous navigator, 45.

 Reagan, John B. of Dorchester and Boston’s Keltic citizens, 83.

 Reamie, Marcus, the hair-cutter, 75.

 Records of the London Company, proprietors of Virginia, 56.

 Red Men’s fort, 88.

 _Redpath Weekly_, 123.

 Reeves, Mr., a teacher, 1767, 42.

 Reid’s History of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, 91.

 Reformers who have become distinguished included, 22.

 Regiment of Dillon fought at Savannah, 63.

 Regiment of Walsh fought at Savannah, 63.

 Representatives elected at Charlestown to make laws for the government
    of the colony, 52.

 Revere, Paul, in Durham, 1774, 35.

 Review of the Year, 1907, 103.

 Revolutionary Rolls of New Hampshire, 94.

 Revolution, prior to, most important men were Irish by birth, 69.

 Rhode Island building, Jamestown Exposition, 108.

 Rhode Island commission, 108.

 Rhode Island, Great Swamp in, 88.

 Rhode Island Historical Society, 33.

 Rhode Island national guard, 111.

 Roanoke Island, “first-comers” landed at, 46.

 Robert Emmet Association, Columbus, O., 106.

 Roberts, William Hugh, comment of Jackson’s letter, 100.

 Robin, Abbe, chaplain of French fleet, 87, 88.

 Rochambeau, Comte de, 62.

 Roche, James Jeffrey, LL. D., paper by, 17.

 Roche, James Jeffrey of Mass., U. S. consul, 108.

 Rochester, Minn., 117.

 Roosevelt, Pres. Theodore, 110, 120.

 Roosevelt, Theodore, and many others, sent pictureless to posterity,
    19.

 Routh, Francis, son of Sir Randolph, partner of Felix Carbray, 122.

 Routh, Sir Randolph, 122.

 Roxbury, Mass., 89.

 Royal Academy in London, 92.

 Rule, the Scotch gardener, 75.

 Russell, Governor, 119.

 Ryan, First Lieut. John J., 12th U. S. Cavalry, 112.

 Ryan, First Lieut. Thomas F., 11th U. S. Cavalry recruiting officer,
    110.

 Ryan, James W., chosen mayor of Vergennes, Vt., 105.


 Saint Simon, Marquis de, 62.

 San Francisco, 119.

 San Francisco, Cal., 104, 111, 119.

 Sarsfield, Count, letter to Capt. John Paul Jones, 67.

 Scientific men, list of, 29.

 “Scotch-Irish” omitted, 22.

 Scully, D. J., paper by, 69.

 Seattle, 112.

 Second Battalion of Engineers, 112.

 “Second Colony” transported, 48.

 Second Infantry, Civil War, 105.

 Second U. S. Infantry, 111.

 _Serapis_ and _Bon Homme Richard_, action between, 62, 63.

 _Serapis_, 26 seamen escape from, 61.

 Settlement, ruin of, threatened, 51.

 Settlers murmur against Proprietors, 51.

 Seventeenth Infantry, 106.

 Shane the Proud, Prince of Ulster, 93.

 Shannon, Ens. William, of Virginia, 101.

 Shannon family, anent the, 101.

 Shannon, Nathaniel, came to Boston, 1687, 101.

 Shannon, Nathaniel, first naval officer of Boston, 101.

 Shannon, Nathaniel, Jr., ship merchant of Portsmouth, 101.

 Shannon, Robert, mayor of Derry, 101.

 Shannon, Thomas, captain of N. H. militia, 101.

 Shaw, Mrs. Robert Gould, widow of Col. Shaw, died, Boston, 104.

 Shea, Denis, 121.

 Shea, John B., obituary of, 120, 121.

 Shepherd, Hon. William, ex-mayor, Lynn, Mass., died, 108.

 Sheridan, Philip, a “man without a race,” 19.

 Ship from Ireland cast away, article, 38.

 Sir John Hawkins in expedition to Mexico, 47.

 Sir Richard Greenville, voyage undertaken by, 45.

 Sir Walter Raleigh, a famous navigator, 45.

 Site of Boston’s first place of business ignored, 81.

 Sixty-Ninth regiment, N. Y. City, 107.

 Smerwick, a well-merited tribute, inhabitants of, 48.

 Smerwick Bay, entered by aid of “a hulke of Dublin,” 48.

 Smith, Gen. Samuel, U. S. Senate, 74.

 Smith, Jeremiah, promoter of papermaking, 86.

 Smith, Lieut.-Col. Lewis, U. S. A., died, 107.

 Smith, Robert, first secretary of state and attorney-general from
    Maryland, an Irish-American, 74.

 Soldiers, list of, 23, 24.

 Somersworth High School, 121.

 Somersworth, N. H., 121.

 Spaniards and Indians capture Miles Philips’ whole company, 47.

 Spaniards threaten invasion from the South, 51.

 Spanish authorities advance with an armed party as far as St. Helena
    Island, but soon retreat, 52.

 Springfield, Mass., 110.

 Stack, Edward, Captain, certificate regarding Capt. Paul Jones, 63.

 Stack, Edward, if he has served like a “gentleman and a soldier,” etc.,
    61.

 Stack, Edward, Lieut., 60.

 Stack, Edward, lieutenant, affidavit respecting escape of deserters,
    61.

 Stack of Crotts, captain, letter to Capt. John Paul Jones, 61.

 Stack, Edward, recommended for lieutenant, 59.

 Standard Oil Company, 120.

 Stang, Rt. Rev. William, D. D., death of, 104.

 Stang, Rt. Rev. William, obituary of, 117, 118.

 Stang, Rt. Rev. William, published works of, 117, 118.

 St. Anne’s Church, Cranston, R. I., 117.

 St. Anthony’s Church, 118.

 State Constitution of Massachusetts adopted, 93.

 Statesmen, distinguished, list of, 22, 23.

 St. Bridget’s Asylum Association, 125.

 St. Bridget’s Asylum, Quebec, 124.

 St. Dominic’s Church, Portland, 121.

 St. Edward’s Church, 117.

 St. Gabriel’s Church, 124.

 St. John’s Church, Canton, Mass., 103.

 St. Joseph’s Church, Lewiston, Me., 121.

 St. Joseph’s Hospital, 118.

 St. Lawrence’s Church, 118.

 St. Lawrence’s presbytery, 118.

 St. Mary’s Chapel, 118.

 St. Mary’s Home, 118.

 St. Mary’s Hospital, Rochester, Minn., 117.

 St. Mary’s School Alumni Association, Salem, 113.

 St. Mary’s Seminary in Baltimore, 73.

 Stevenson, Dr. John, laid foundation of Baltimore’s trade, 69.

 Stevenson’s work continued by the Purviances, etc., see names, 79.

 Stoughton, Don Thomas, made Spanish consul at New York, 37.

 St. Patrick’s Church, Lewiston, Me., 115.

 St. Patrick’s Church, New York City, 76.

 St. Patrick’s Church, Quebec, 125.

 St. Patrick’s Day, 1737, 93.

 St. Patrick’s Day celebration in Baltimore, 95.

 St. Patrick’s dead, the very flower of the pioneer families who built
    up the Church in New York, 78.

 St. Patrick’s graveyard, number of interments, 77.

 St. Patrick’s Literary Institute, 124.

 St. Peter’s Church in Barclay St., New York, 78.

 Strawbridge, Robert, the first Methodist preacher, an Irishman, 74.

 Stryker, Gen. president of Society of the Cincinnati, 42.

 St. Sulpice Theological Seminary, 121.

 Sullivan commemoration service, 115.

 Sullivan, Dr. M. F., Library of, 112.

 Sullivan, Gen. John, incident of expedition under, 39.

 Sullivan, Gen. John, New Hampshire’s most distinguished Kelt, 92.

 Sullivan, John B., death of, New Bedford, Mass., 104.

 Sullivan, John B., obituary of, 118.

 Sullivan, John B., parents of, 118.

 Sullivan, John B., wives and children of, 118.

 Sullivan, John, co-partner the papermaking, Dorchester, 87.

 Sullivan, Maj.-Gen. John, burial place of, 115.

 Sullivan, Mark E., 118.

 Sullivan, Owen, sons of, 92.

 Sullivan’s Island deserted to save from starvation, 51.

 Sullivan, the first man in active rebellion, 36.

 Sullivan, William B., reads paper, 113.

 _Sunday Globe_, Boston, 112.

 _Sunday Herald_, Boston, 115.

 Supplies and new settlers brought by ship from Europe, 52.

 Sweetman, the one Irish day-laborer, 75.

 Swift, Jonathan, author of Gulliver’s Travels, 95.


 Tablet in Quebec, under which “repose the remains of thirteen soldiers
    of General Montgomery’s army, who were killed in the assault on
    Quebec,” 44.

 Taft, William H., Secretary, arrived from Seattle, 112, 113.

 Taney, Roger Brooke, first and only chief justice of U. S. an
    Irish-American, 74.

 Tara Hall, Quebec, 125.

 Target practice, accident in, 113, 114, 115.

 Tarne, Myles, a leather dresser, 90.

 Taschereau, Cardinal, 122.

 Taschereau, Chief Justice, 122.

 Temple, Capt. Robert, with Irish Protestants, 88.

 Tennessee and Kentucky riflemen, 1500 of, 97, 98.

 Tenth Cavalry, 112.

 Tenth Infantry, Civil War, 105.

 “The American Vandyke,” 92.

 The Battle of New Orleans, paper by Hon. A. L. Morrison, 97.

 _The Boston News-Letter_, 1725, 91.

 _The Boston Sunday Herald_, 106.

 “The Boy and the Flying Squirrel,” 92.

 “The Early Catholic Church in Massachusetts,” 113.

 “The incivility among manie of the Irish, the Virginians,” due to
    ignorance, 58.

 The Kelts of Colonial Boston, paper by Thomas Ackland, 80.

 “The most fashionable man in New York,” 38.

 “The Nehemiah Walter Elegy on Elijah Corler,” 68.

 _The New York Times_, 106.

 “These Irish families are the cream of the cream of the old families
    here,” 38.

 The Story of the Irish in Boston, 95.

 The Tyrone, Ireland, Constitution, 91.

 They Fired Three Volleys, 95.

 Third Artillery, 107.

 Thirtieth U. S. Infantry, 115.

 Thomson, Charles, second signer of Declaration of Independence, 91.

 Tokio, 112.

 Treaty of Ghent signed Christmas Day, 1814, 97.

 Trustees, five, appointed to provide “a good and convenient location
    for a new graveyard” paid $37,050 to Alderman Charles Henry Hall for
    burial ground, 77.

 “Tweed ring,” 119.

 Twelfth Infantry in the Santiago campaign, 105.

 Twelfth U. S. Cavalry, 112.

 Twenty-seventh Inniskillen Foot, 97.


 “Ulster has many Montgomerys,” 44.

 Uniform dress for the navy, signers for, 64.

 United Irish League, 125.

 University Libraries receiving Volume VI, 164.

 U. S. Department of State, 106.

 U. S. Military Academy, 111.

 U. S. Ship _Enterprise_, 119.


 Valley Forge, 94.

 Vaughan, Abigail, wife of Nathaniel Shannon, 101.

 Vergennes, Vt., chooses mayor, 105.

 Veteran Corps, N. Y. City, annual banquet, 107.

 Virginia and the Carolinas, a most diversified field for historical
    inquiry, 45.

 Virginia College established at Henrico City, 57.

 “Virtually no immigration during the colonial period,” 17.

 Viscount Planelagh, 43.

 Volume VI of the Journal of the Society, 163.

 Volume VI of the Journal, praise for, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170.


 Walker, Ex-Cong. Joseph H., died, Worcester, Mass., 105.

 Wallace, Rt. Rev. Mgr. Thomas H., died, 115.

 Wallace, Rt. Rev. Mgr. Thomas H., obituary of, 121, 122.

 Walsh, Magistrate, 108.

 Walsh-Serrant, Colonel, 60.

 Walsh-Serrant, Comte de, impossible to remain with Paul Jones, 62.

 Walsh-Serrant, Comte de, Letter to Capt. John Paul Jones, 60.

 Walsh-Serrant, Comte de, Letter to Edward Stack, 62.

 Walsh’s Irish Regiment of Marine Artillery, French Army, paper by T. H.
    Murray, 59.

 Walter, Nehemiah, article, 68.

 Walter, Nehemiah, ordained colleague with John Eliot, 68.

 Washington, D. C., 107, 108, 110, 111.

 Washington, General, 94.

 Washington, George, 37.

 Washington, George, compliments Purviance, 71.

 Washington, General, concerning transporting of fagots, 86.

 Washington, George, selecting site for the White House, 40.

 Washington summons all his officers to Newburgh, 43.

 _Wasp_ and _Franklin_, 103.

 Waterford port established by Raleigh, 49.

 Waterloo, fatal field of, 97.

 Watson, Lilias, wife of Thomas Shannon, 101.

 Welch, Charles A., Harvard’s oldest alumnus, died at Cohasset, Mass.,
    85.

 Welch, John, tax-payer, 1682, 85.

 Welch, John, the progenitor of a distinguished family, 85.

 West, Benjamin, famous English painter, 92.

 West Indies, wanderers constantly leaving for the American coast, 54.

 West Point Academy, 109.

 White, Capt. John, dates story of fifth voyage “from my house at
    Newtown, in Kilmore,” 49.

 White, Capt. John, distributed potato plants to people, “the first ever
    seen in Europe,” 49.

 White, Capt. John, of “Fourth Voyage” to Virginia, 48.

 White House plan by Hoban accepted, 40.

 White’s fourth expedition, names of persons landed from, in North
    Carolina, 50.

 White Star steamer _Oceanic_, 120.

 Wiley, Congressman of Alabama, introduced bill, 116.

 Winthrop fleet, so called, brought several merchants from maritime
    ports of Ireland, 83.

 Winthrop’s History of New England, 95.

 Worcester County probate court, 107.

 Worcester First Church, Thaddeus McCarthy, pastor, 90.

 Worcester, Mass., 105, 121.

 Wylie, Rev. Dr. David G., 108.


 Yeamans, Governor, dies, 1674, 52.

 Yeamans, Sir John, and civil disturbance, 50.

 Yokohama, 112.

 Youghal port established by Raleigh, 49.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected obvious typographical errors and variations in
      spelling.
 2. Retained archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 4. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN-IRISH
HISTORICAL SOCIETY (VOL. VII) ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
